CONTENTS
Introduction
page  vii
Chronology
xxiv
Further Reading
xxvi
Human,  All  Too Human
Volume I
Preface
1  Of First and Last Things
2  On the History of the Moral Sensations
3  The Religious Life
6o
4  From the Souls of Artists and Writers
8o
5  Tokens of Higher and Lower Culture
6  Man in Society
7  Woman and Child
8  A Glance at the State
9  Man Alone with Himself
Among Friends: An Epilogue
Volume II
Preface
Part One  Assorted Opinions and Maxims
Part Two  The Wanderer and His Shadow
Index
INTRODUCTION
'Human, All Too Human is the monument of a crisis.' With these apt words
Nietzsche  began  his  own  reflection,  in  his  autobiographical  Ecce  Homo
(1888),' on this remarkable collection of almost 1t400 aphorisms published
in  three  instalments,  the  first  of  which  had  appeared  in  1878,  ten  years
earlier.  The  crisis  to  which  he  refers  was  first  and  foremost  a  crisis  of
multiple dimensions in his own life. Human, All Too Human was the extended
product  of  a  period  of  devastating  health  problems  that  necessitated
Nietzsche's resignation in 1879 from his professorship in classical philology
at Basel University. These problems were to plague him for the remaining
decade of his brief productive life (which ended with his complete physical
and mental collapse in January 1889, at the age of 44, from which he never
recovered in the eleven years of marginal existence that remained to  him
before his death  in 1900).  Human,  All Too Human also marked Nietzsche's
transition from the philologist and cultural critic he had been into the kind
of philosopher and writer he came to be.
But the crisis was above all a crisis in Nietzsche's intellectual development; and although it was very much his own, it presaged the larger crisis toward which he came to see our entire culture and civilization moving, and
subsequently came to call 'the death of God'.> In his own case, this crisis was
precipitated not only by his deepening appreciation of the profound and
extensive consequences of the collapse of traditional ways of thinking, but
also - and  more  immediately - by  his  growing  recognition  of  the  insufficiency of the resources of both the Enlightenment and the Romanticism to  which  he  had  been  so  strongly  attracted  to  fill  the  void.  The  three
instalments of Human, All Too Human are no less important for the insight
they yield into the kind of struggle in which Nietzsche was engaged than
they are for the many sparks that fly in the course of his efforts to find new
ways to go on.
The world  around Nietzsche did not  appear  to be a  world  headed  for
crisis. The ordeals,  horrors and dramatic changes of the century to come
were largely unimagined, and indeed unimaginable, even to Nietzsche, who
was far more prescient than most- even to the point of deeming the advent
of air travel to be inevitable (1:267). In 1876, when he began working on the
material that was published two years later in what is now the first volume
of Human, All Too Human, Europe was again at (relative) peace. It had been
ten years since the Austro-Prussian War that had left Prussia dominant in
Central Europe; and it had been five years since the brief Franco-Prussian
vii
I N T R O D U CTIO N
War (in which Nietzsche had briefly served as a volunteer medical orderly,
with disastrous consequences for his health),  which further enhanced and
extended Prussia's sway,  this time at France's expense. German unification
under  Prussian leadership had  been  achieved  in 1871,  and the new Reich
appeared to be thriving, with Wilhelm on the throne and (more importantly)
Otto von Bismarck at the helm.
Everything seemed to be coming along  very nicely for Western civilization in general, Europe in particular and Germany more specifically. It was the heyday of European imperialism, with India recently incorporated into
the British Empire,  and much of the rest of the non-Western world coming
under  European  sway. The industrial revolution was sweeping all  before
it,  and  capitalism  was  triumphant.  New  technologies  and  modes  of
transportation and communication were transforming Western  societies.
(Nietzsche himself must have been one of the very first philosophers to own
one of the newly invented typewriters, although it proved to be of little use
to him.) Despite the success of conservative elements of European societies
in retaining their social position and political power,  forces preparing the
way  for  their  eventual  replacement  by  more  popular  forms  of  social,
cultural, economic and political organization-for better or for worse -were
gathering.
The  physical  sciences  were  advancing  spectacularly;  and  while  the
influence of Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud had yet to be felt, the social and
historical  disciplines  were  maturing,  and  the  biological  sciences  were
coming on strong. Charles Darwin already loomed large. His Origin of Species
had  been  published  in  1859,  and  his  Descent of  Man  in  1871.  Germany,
making up for lost time, was emerging as an economic,  political and technological  powerhouse,  as well as  the  world's  new  leader  in many of the sciences. It also continued its century-long dominance in philosophy, with
ever-mutating forms of idealism, neo-Kantianism, naturalism and materialism competing in the aftermath  of Hegel. Religion,  enjoying  official state status  in  many  countries  and  the  unquestioning  allegiance  of  the  vast
majority of their populations, seemed immune from serious challenge. The
arts, literature and music were flourishing as well, in Germany as elsewhere
in Europe; and in 1876 the frenzy surrounding Richard Wagner - to which
Nietzsche  was  no  stranger - rose  to  new  heights,  with  the  opening  of
Bayreuth,  and the performance of the first  complete  four-opera  cycles of
Wagner's monumental Ring of the Nibulungs.
Yet Nietzsche was convinced that all was far from well. He was repelled
by the popular  culture and brave new social, economic and political world
burgeoning around him, and could no longer take seriously the intellectual
and  religious tradition associated  with  it. By 1876  he also  found himself
increasingly  estranged  from  the  newly  fashionable  alternatives  to  the
tradition that its critics and rivals had been touting, including his erstwhile
idols  and  mentors  Arthur  Schopenhauer  and  Wagner.  Everywhere  he
looked, even at those things and thinkers supposedly representing the pride
of our  culture  and the zenith  of  humanity,  what he saw was not only far
from divine but all-too-human.
viii
INT R O D UC T I O N
Nietzsche  had  long yearned - and  continued  to  yearn throughout his
productive  life  - for  a  higher  humanity  with  a  worth  great  enough  to
warrant the affirmation of life even in the absence of any transcendently
supplied meaning. He now had come to the hard realization that the only
possible way to that higher humanity required an uncompromising examination of everything human and all-too-human that at once stands in our way and is our point of departure, and a sober stocktaking of what there is
to work with in undertaking what he was later to call the enhancement of
human life. The idea and ideal he seized upon at this juncture to guide and
accompany  him was  that of the  'free  spirit',  older and  wiser heir of the
Enlightenment. Nietzsche paid explicit tribute to  the ethos of this newly
adopted lineage in his dedication of the first edition of Human, All Too Human
to Voltaire,  Enlightenment thinker par excellence,  who had died exactly a
century earlier, and whose spirit he now embraced.
Human, All Too  Human  was Nietzsche's second book; and it was as far
removed from the kind of book professors of classical languages and literatures were supposed to write as anything could be. His first book, The Birth of Tragedy (1872), had been a scandal in the eyes of his scholarly colleagues
owing to its  disregard of prevailing norms of scholarship  and its blatant
advocacy of Wagner as the reincarnation of the spirit of the tragic culture of
the Greeks - but it at least had a recognizably classical literary topic. Human,
All Too Human, as initially published, was a volume of 638 aphorisms - that
is, short observations and reflections ranging from one or two sentences to
a  long  paragraph,  of a  relatively  self-contained  nature.  This style was  a
radically  new  one  for  Nietzsche,  reminiscent  of  the  writings  of  such
observers  of  the  human  scene  as  Montaigne  and  La  Rochefoucauld.
Nietzsche had long greatly admired their manner of thought and expression, and found himself drawn to emulate them in his search for a voice that lent itself both to his own changing temperament and circumstances and to
the decidedly unphilological tasks towards which he was turning.
The publication of Human, All Too Human completed Nietzsche's estrangement from his erstwhile scholarly profession, from which he officially retired shortly thereafter.  It also completed his much more  painful  estrangement
from  Wagner,  whose  devoted  admirer,  champion and  intimate  younger
friend  Nietzsche  had  been.  Nietzsche  himself  claimed  to  have  begun
writing the book in reaction to the first Bayreuth production of Wagner's
Ring cycle, the entire social spectacle of which appalled him; and although
he in fact would appear to have begun work on it some months earlier, in
the spring of 1876,  it certainly was written during a period in which his
formerly  close  relationship  to  Wagner  had  become  severely  strained.
Nietzsche knew that Wagner would  loathe  the book;  and  its  dedication
to  Voltaire  was  undoubtedly  a  very  deliberate  gesture  of  defiance  and
independence in Wagner's direction. Eight years after its first publication,
when Nietzsche republished it, he dropped the dedication- perhaps because
he no longer wanted Voltaire to be taken as paradigmatic of his evolving
conception of the 'free spirit', but perhaps also because Wagner by then had
died, and such gestures were no longer either needed or fitting.
ix
I NT R O D U C T I O N
In his  discussion in  Ecce Homo  of  the 'crisis'  of  which Human, All  Too
Human was the 'monument', Nietzsche goes on to say of it:  'Here I liberated
myself from what in my nature did not belong to me.' He had given Human,
All Too  Human  the  subtitle  'A Book  for Free  Spirits';  and  he  went  on  to
characterize  the 'free spirit' in similar language,  as 'a spirit that has become
free,  that has again taken possession of itself'.3 Among the things  he clearly
had in mind were his attachments to Schopenhauer and Wagner, who had
been  at the centre of his intellectual life  for the previous decade. They had
been  the subjects of his last  two major publications prior to Human, All Too
Human,  in  which he had lavished praise upon them even while privately
beginning to distance himself from them: Schopenhauer as Educator ( 1874) and
Richard  Wagner  in  Bayreuth  (1876),  the  final  two  essays  of  his  four-part
Untimely Meditations.
A student of classical languages and literatures rather than of philosophy,
it had been Nietzsche's accidental  discovery  of Schopenhauer's  magnum
opus The World as Will and Representation in 1865 that had introduced - and
seduced- him to philosophy. His spiritual seduction by Wagner three years
later (in 1868)  influenced him even more  profoundly.  The spell cast upon
him by the two of them together is very apparent both in his thinking and
enthusiasms in The Birth of Tragedy and in the fact that he ventured to write
and publish such a book. Nietzsche's father had died when he was a young
child;  and he in  effect  adopted Schopenhauer as  his intellectual godfather
and Wagner  as his  emotional and spiritual father  figure.  It was for good
reason that it  occurred  to him to write in aphorism 381  of the first volume
of Human, All Too Human: 'Correcting nature. - If one does not have a good
father one should furnish oneself with one.' Yet by the time he wrote these
words he was well  beyond  this  point,  attempting to liberate  himself from
the fathers with whom he had furnished himself.
It is well worth bearing in mind who the Nietzsche was who published
this book of aphorisms in 1878. Neither he nor anyone else had the slightest
idea  of  what  he  would  go  on  to  do  and  become.  He  was  a 33-year-old
philology  professor  whose health  and  academic career  were  both failing
badly.  His  youthful  vigour  and  promise  were  now  but  sadly  faded
memories to his professional colleagues. His only book, published six years
earlier,  was  the  scandalous  Birth  of  Tragedy;  and  his  only  subsequent
publications of any significance were the two essays just mentioned and two
previous 'untimely meditations', David Strauss,  the Confessor and the Writer
(1873)  and  On  the  Uses  and  Disadvantages  of  History for  Life  (1874).  His
enthusiasm  for  and  association  with  Wagner  had  earned  him  a  certain
notoriety, but it had done him no good academically; and he otherwise had
little reputation at all, except perhaps as a gamble that had appeared not to
be working  out.  He was not  thought  of  as  a  philosopher,  having had  no
philosophical  training  and  having  published  nothing  resembling  a  conventional  philosophical  treatise.  He  had  written  a  short,  ambitious  but sketchy  essay,  'On  Truth  and Lies  in  a  Nonmoral  Sense',  several  years
earlier; but it remained unfinished, and he never did publish it. His thoughts
had indeed begun to tum toward philosophy,  and he had even gone so far
X
INTR O D U C T I O N
as to apply for the Chair in Philosophy at Basel when it became vacant; but
he was unsuccessful in this attempt to switch professions,  for reasons that
are easy enough to understand.
Even  if  Human,  All Too  Human  had  been  published  by  a  professional
philosopher,  it very probably would not have been regarded as a contribution  to  the  philosophical  literature  by  academic  philosophers  either  in Nietzsche's own time or subsequently. Nor is it clear that it should be;  for
there is much in it that does not seem to have much to do with philosophical matters. Even the ideas on philosophical topics it addresses are seldom presented in  recognizably philosophical ways.  More  of it can be seen as
having philosophical relevance in retrospect, particularly if one looks back
upon  it  with  Nietzsche's  later  writings  in  mind,  and  if  one's  idea  of
philosophical relevance has been influenced by the impact of his thinking
with  respect  to  the  philosophical  enterprise.  Even  so,  however,  all  three
instalments of the work are very much the product of a mind in transition,
moving in many different directions and in many different ways, heedless
of disciplinary boundaries and norms,  with only Nietzsche's interests and
intellectual conscience as his map and compass.
The aphoristic form Nietzsche adopted (and adapted to his purposes) in
Human, All Too Human had long been a favoured literary form of observers
of the human scene who preferred to comment incisively on many things,
rather than writing essays about a selected few. But this form may also have
been virtually necessitated by Nietzsche's increasingly severe and disabling
health  problems,  which frequently rendered him incapable  of writing or
even thinking for extended periods of time. He had to make maximum use
of  the  short  periods  of  respite  that  came  to  him  between  frequent  and
extended bouts of misery. He struggled to surmount his wretched condition,
and did  so to much greater effect than most people in his situation could;
but it was a hard and tortured struggle, giving poignant significance to his
subsequent emphasis upon 'hardness',  self-mastery,  self-discipline,  and to
his refusal to become preoccupied and deterred by suffering. The flair he
discovered in himself for aphoristic writing at this time thus accorded well
with  necessity.  It  would  be  unwarranted,  however,  to  assume  that
Nietzsche's recourse to it is indicative of the absence of any underlying unity
and  coherence  of  thought  and  intention  here  and  subsequently.  So  he
himself  observes in aphorism 128 of the second instalment,  very much to
this point: 'Against the shortsighted. - Do you think this work must be fragmentary because I give it to you (and have to give it to you) in fragments?'
Nietzsche  had  long  been  plagued  by  poor  eyesight  and  eye  pain  that
would afflict him when he either read or wrote extensively, by migraine
headaches and by indigestion and other gastric problems that made him pay
a high price for departures from the blandest of diets. His problems were
compounded by a variety of ailments - dysentery and diphtheria among
them- he contracted while serving as an orderly during the Franco-Prussian
War, the effects of which continued to plague him. And the syphilis he seems
somehow to have acquired (despite leading a virtually celibate life), that was
the likely cause of his final collapse a dozen years later, may well have begun
xi
I N T R O D U CTIO N
to contribute to the deterioration of his health during the gestation period
of Human, All Too Human.
So Nietzsche went from one health crisis to another, finding the rigours
and burdens of his academic position increasingly difficult to bear, despite
the  fact  that  he  rarely  had  as  many  as  a  dozen  students  attending  his
lectures. He often was unable to read or write, and frequently was obliged
to take medical leaves from his teaching. His collapses were all too common,
and  at  times  he  was  virtually  an  invalid.  He  visited  clinics,  spas  and
specialists, whose diagnoses and prescriptions may often have only made
things  worse.  Alternating  bouts  of  blinding  headaches  and  wracking
vomiting would last for days; and his lecturing became ever more sporadic
and difficult. Finally,  in the  spring of 1879,  he  submitted  his resignation,
receiving a  small  pension that was his sole income thereafter. He then left
Basel and began the nomadic life - moving from boarding-house to boarding-house in search of the right climate and conditions - that he would lead for the decade of active life remaining to him prior to his collapse.
It is miraculous that anyone with such severe problems and living such a
life could have written anything at all, let alone the series of brilliant books
that Nietzsche managed to complete in this period, beginning with the first
volume of Human, All Too Human.  And  to  all  of this  must be  added the
publication  history  of  these  books,  which  compounds  the  miracle.  This
history  was  troubled  by  Nietzsche's  often  strained  relations  with  his
publishers and printers, and plagued by such other all-too-human difficulties as his eye  problems,  requiring him  to  resort to  dictation much of the time,  and  to  reliance  on  the  assistance  of  others  to  put his  manuscripts
together,  as  well  as  making  proof-reading  a  torment.  But  worst  of  all,
Nietzsche's publication history is a veritable chronicle of failure. A recent
study by William Schaberg makes all of this painfully clear,  setting out the
whole long and  sorry  story  in depressing detail.4 The  Birth of Tragedy sold
modestly well,  and attracted a good deal of attention - even if much of it
was hostile. But the same cannot be said of any of Nietzsche's subsequent
books, during his  sentient lifetime. Prior to his  collapse, none of them sold
more than a few hundred copies,  and few  of them attracted any attention
whatsoever.
Human, All Too Human is a vivid case in point. Of the 1,000 copies in the
first printing of the original version, only 120 were sold in 1878;  and  more
than  half remained unsold  in 1886,  when  Nietzsche reacquired  them  and
repackaged them  with a  new  introduction as the  first  volume of the  twovolume second edition. The  supplement he  published in 1879  under  the subtitle ' Assorted Opinions and Maxims' sold even more poorly: of the 1,000
copies printed, only a third had been sold by 1886. The second supplement
The Wanderer and His Shadow, published a year later, fared even worse: fewer
than  200  of its initial 1,000  copies had  been  sold by 1886,  when Nietzsche
acquired the rights to both supplements and republished them with a new
introduction, as the second volume of the second edition of Human, All Too
Human. There was no true reprinting of additional copies until 1893, when
another  printing of 1,000  copies of the  combined  work  was  run;  and  its
xii
I N T R O D U C T I O N
sales  remained  slow  even  after  his  later  works  began  to receive  more
attention.
Human, All Too Human attained greater circulation and availability as part
of the editions of his collected works that began to appear after Nietzsche's
death; but it was long eclipsed by The Birth of Tragedy before it and by Thus
Spoke Zarathustra and its sequels after it, both in Europe and in the Englishspeaking world. The same is true of the other two works in Nietzsche's' free spirit' series, Daybreak and The Gay Science. The neglect of Human, All Too
Human  in  the  English-speaking  world  is  at  least  partly owing  to Walter
Kaufmann's  lack  of  interest in it.  It was through  his  translations and his
widely  read  study  Nietzsche:  Philosopher,  Psychologist,  Antichrist,  first
published in 1950, that many English-speaking readers after World War II
became interested in and acquainted with Nietzsche. Kaufmann translated
Nietzsche's  first  book,  The  Birth  of  Tragedy,  and  virtually  everything
Nietzsche published from The Gay Science onward; but he never got. around
to translating any of the things Nietzsche published in the interval, during
the crucial period in which he published not only the three instalments of
Human, All Too Human but also the four Untimely Meditations and Daybreak,
except for brief  excerpts which  he inserted in other  volumes. Indeed,  even
Kaufmann's translation of The Gay Science was something of an afterthought,
appearing long after most of his other translations.5
Kaufmann can hardly be blamed for having the interests he did, and for
the things he did not choose to do; but they had consequences, since there
were  no  other  readily available complete translations of Human,  All  Too
Human  or Daybreak  in English  until  the  early  198os,  when Marion Faber
translated  the  first volume  of Human,  All  Too  Human  (published by  the
University  of  Nebraska  Press)  and  Hollingdale's Cambridge University
Press translations appeared. Their long inaccessibility ensured that these
works, and Nietzsche's thinking during the period in which he wrote them,
would remain virtually unknown to English-speaking readers during the
preceding  three  decades.  (They  likewise  had  been  virtually  invisible
previously, when Nietzsche was known mainly second-hand in the Englishspeaking world,  and was commonly assumed to be the proto-Nazi he had been made out to be by Nazi propaganda.)
The problem was compounded by Kaufmann's treatment of Human, All
Too  Human  (and  Daybreak  and  The Gay Science  as  well)  in  his  popular
intellectual-biographical study, which had little competition for nearly two
decades.  This  entire  period,  for  Kaufmann,  was  a  gestation  period  in
Nietzsche's thought,  of little interest in its own right. He appears to have
deemed it deserving  of comment at all chiefly for the  anticipations  to be
found  in  some  aphorisms  of  ideas  that  became  prominent  in  his  later
thinking,  and for the ammunition other aphorisms afford that were useful
in combating Nietzsche's Nazi misinterpretation. So Human, All Too Human
is relegated to a few pages,  in a chapter entitled 'Discovery of the Will to
Power'. 'There would be little sense',  Kaufmann wrote (without explanation),  'in  trying  here  to  sample  the  gems  of  Human,  all-too-Human  or
[Daybreak).' He restricted himself to asserting, with a few illustrations, that,
xiii
I N T R O D U CTIO N
'Proceeding  quite  unsystematically  and  considering  each  problem  on  its
own merits,  without a theory to prove or an axe to grind, Nietzsche reverts
now and then to explanations in terms of what he was later to call a will to
power.'6  The  works  of  this  period,  for  Kaufmann,  were  of  significance
primarily as the record of Nietzsche's development from the author of The
Birth of Tragedy into a psychological thinker on  a par  with Freud,  with  his
further transformation into a philosopher coming somewhat later.
There certainly is some truth in this. Human, All Too Human  undeniably
does  show  us Nietzsche as psychologist both under  development  and  at
work,  inventing a kind  of  psychologizing  for which he found a wealth of
applications all around him- socially, culturally, behaviourally, intellectually,
even philosophically- and simultaneously inventing himself as a new kind
of  thinker  capable  of  employing  this  sort  of  analysis  to  fascinating  and
important effect. He  was  not  operating  in  a  void.  He had  some  brilliant
aphoristic predecessors, the inspiration of such Enlightenment exemplars as
Voltaire,  and  the  benefit  of  reading  his 'educator'  and  philosophicalpsychological  mentor  Schopenhauer.  He  also  had  the  more  immediate example  and  encouragement of  his  newfound  friend  Paul Ree,  who had
just  written  a  book  in  a  somewhat  similar  spirit  entitled  Psychological
Observations. Ree's influence  was  readily and  profusely acknowledged by
Nietzsche, who went so far as to say that his own position at this time could
be called 'Reealism'; and it was evident to all who knew him- including the
Wagners,  who bitterly lamented it (all the more  because Ree was Jewish).
But the results were much more than the sum of their influences even here.
And they also added up to something that was much more than psychology
as well. It is true enough that Nietzsche's  thinking continued  to develop,
even from one book to the next in this period,  as well as over the course of
the  next  decade;  and  that,  as  Kaufmann  maintained,  Nietzsche's  philosophical maturity was yet some time off. Yet his accomplishment in the three instalments of Human, All Too Human is remarkable in its own right, and can
stand on its own feet. If he had died without  publishing  another thing (as
might very well have happened), it would have been sufficient to earn him
an important place in the intellectual history of the past several  centuries -
even if a somewhat different one than he has come to have.
The gulf that separates  this work from Nietzsche's previous published
writings  is  wide.  The  enthusiasms,  aspirations  and  assumptions  that  so
strikingly pervade and animate his earlier work are no longer in evidence.
It is a much more sober and analytical,  colder and wiser thinker who is at
work here. Its author is still hopeful of finding both a diagnosis and a cure
to what ails our culture and threatens its future, and resists Schopenhauer's
pessimism;  but he is as disillusioned now with Wagner, the new Reich and
other  pied pipers of modern  times as he  earlier  had been with  traditional
religious  consolations  and  their  philosophical  cousins.  He  has  become
convinced  that  only  something  like  a  continuation  and  radicalization  of
Enlightenment  thinking,  getting  to  the  bottom  of  things  and  ruthlessly
exposing all false hopes and dangerous palliatives, can afford us at least the
possibility  of  a  future  worth  having  and  a  life  worth  living. Nietzsche's
xiv
I N T R O D U C T I O N
dedication to Voltaire  was more  than a  slap  at Wagner (although  that it
surely  was).  It  also  was  the  announcement  of  a  major  intellectual  reorientation,  placing him squarely in the often calurnnied but courageous tradition of Enlightenment thought and effort.
For the Nietzsche of Human, All Too Human nothing is beyond criticismand there is a strong suspicion that (as he would later put it) all 'idols' of our reverence will tum out to be hollow and all-too-human when subjected to
critical  scrutiny.  His new 'psychological' tools are brought  to bear upon
them,  with  results that  amply  support  this  suspicion. But  there  is  more
to the outlook and  way of thinking that  he  is  devising  and  putting into
practice here than this. In 'On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense', some
five years  earlier,  Nietzsche had  begun  sketching  a  fundamentally and
severely naturalistic picture of our general human condition, in a world over
which no benevolent deity reigns and in which no beneficent rationality is
at work. We are depicted as alone and adrift in a godless universe, a mere
cosmic accident,  ill-equipped either to comprehend what is going on or to
do much about it;  and we are kidding ourselves if we think otherwise -
although we seem almost irresistibly drawn to do so. Can we live without
such illusions? Nietzsche was at first inclined to doubt it-as one sees in The
Birth of Tragedy,  written at about the  same time.
By the time of Human, All Too Human,  he seems to have resolved to try.
The  power of myths and illusions to sustain anyone possessed of an uncompromising intellectual conscience is undermined when one sees through them;  and  so  one  may  have  little  other  choice,  if - as  for  Nietzsche -
Kierkegaardian leaps of faith are out of the question, and a Schopenhauerian
negation of life is repellent. Human, All Too Human is a work of cold passion,
in which nothing more is  assumed about  our  humanity than the  picture
sketched in the 'Truth and Lies' essay,  and in which everything in human
life that might seem to be of loftier origins is called before the tribunal of
scrutiny,  with  humbling  results.  Yet  the  spirit  of  the  investigation  is
profoundly and pervasively affirmative; for the passion that drives it is not
only that of an honesty that will tolerate no nonsense or groundless wishful
thinking, but also of a desperate search for enough to work with and ways
of doing so to sustain ourselves despite all. To call this 'secular humanism'
would be to sell it short; for while Nietzsche's outlook is radically secular,
he is far from taking humanity either in general or as embodied in each and
every one of us to be the locus of meaning and value. But it is a kind of toughminded and yet doggedly affirmative naturalism, the upshot of which is that our all-too-human humanity leaves a good deal to be desired, and yet gives
us something to work with that is not to be despised.
But if we are to make something worthwhile of ourselves, we have to take
a good hard look at ourselves. And this, for Nietzsche, means many things.
It means looking at ourselves in the light of everything we can learn about
the  world  and  ourselves  from  the  natural  sciences - most  emphatically
including evolutionary biology, physiology and even medical science. It also
means looking at ourselves in the light of  everything  we can learn about
human life from history,  from the social sciences,  from the study of arts,
XV
I N T R O D U CTIO N
religions,  languages,  literatures,  mores  and  other  features  of  various
cultures. It further means attending closely to human conduct on different
levels of human interaction, to the relation between what people say and
seem  to  think  about  themselves  and  what  they  do,  to  their  reactions  in
different sorts of situations, and to everything else about them that affords
clues to what makes them tick. All of this, and more, is what Nietzsche is up
to in Human, All Too Human. He is at once developing and employing the
various perspectival techniques that seem to him to be relevant to the understanding of what we have come to be and what we have it in us to become.
This involves gathering materials for a reinterpretation and reassessment of
human life, making tentative efforts along those lines and then trying them
out on other human phenomena both to put them to the test and to see what
further light can be shed by doing so.
This multi-perspectival and multi-directional method,  which Nietzsche
employed  with  increasing  dexterity  and  ingenuity  throughout  the  remainder of his productive life, finds its first extended trials and applications in Human, All Too Human. The results are uneven, as one might expect- and
indeed  as is always the case in Nietzsche's  writings  (or, for that matter, in
the case of anyone who engages in such a complex, uncertain and adventuresome  sort of interpretive  enterprise).  Distinguishing  between genuine insights  and  personal  preferences,  prejudices,  over-generalizations,
irresistible puns and other such inspirations is not easy. It often can be done
better by others than by oneself - even if one's intellectual conscience is as
alert  and  vigorous  as  Nietzsche's,  to  whom  the  all-too-human  was  no
stranger. But by precept and example he invites us to subject him to the same
sort of scrutiny to which he subjects others; and that is something many will
want to do. He only asks that one be prepared to have one's very objections
subjected in turn to the same searching critical assessment- for they too may
be questionable.
Nietzsche himself looked back on Human, All Too Human twice in print.
The final time was in his rather creatively and grandiosely self-interpretive
Ecce Homo, in 1888, in the course of a review of all of his main publications
under  the characteristically  immodest  heading  'Why I  Write Such Good
Books'. The occasion of his first subsequent retrospective- the reissuing of
all three instalments together in 1886- may itself have had its all-too-human
motivations  (not  the  least  of  which  was  Nietzsche's  hope  that  by  repackaging them with new prefaces he might be able to sell more of them and attract more attention to them).  Nonetheless,  the two new prefaces he
wrote  on  this  occasion  are  of  no  little  interest;  and  it  is  important  for
readers to bear in mind that they were written long after the material they
precede- eight years after the first volume, and six and seven years after the
two  parts  of  the  second  volume.  Indeed,  the  prefaces  themselves  were
written at· different  times  and places - the  former  in Nice,  on the French
Mediterranean  coast  in  Spring  1886,  and  the  latter  in  Sils  Maria,  in  the
mountainous Swiss Engadine region,  in September of that year. They both
deserve close reading, both before and after one has made one's way through
the maze of the 1,400 aphorisms.
xvi
I N T R O D U CTIO N
In the first preface Nietzsche sees himself at the time of the first volume
as already burdened with the large and heavy questions that compelled him
toward philosophy,  and also as struggling to achieve the intellectual and
spiritual freedom and resources needed to deal with them, which he feels
he  had  lacked  in  sufficient  measure  previously.  He  also  sees  himself  as
having been in a precarious state of health both physically and intellectually,
slowly convalescing from the maladies of both sorts that had threatened to
engulf him. The same theme is sounded  again in the second  preface;  and
there he makes it even clearer what the chief dangers were to which he had
to develop resistance and learn to overcome. He refers to these writings as
'a continuation and redoubling of a spiritual cure, namely of the anti-romantic self-treatment  that  my  still  healthy  instinct  had  itself  discovered  and prescribed for me against a temporary attack of the most dangerous form of
romanticism', and as the expressions of a 'courageous pessimism' that is the
'antithesis of all romantic mendacity' (u:P:2, 4).
As Nietzsche observes in the first preface, his determination to resist and
reject all such temptations (which for him could be summed up in a single
name:  Wagner)  was  still  immature  here,  and  was  not  yet  'that  mature
freedom of spirit which is equally self-mastery and discipline of the heart
and permits access to many and contradictory modes of thought', and which
he evidently feels he subsequently had come to attain (1: P: 4). But he sees
himself in Human, All Too Human as having been on the way to it. And it is
of no little importance to the understanding  of  Nietzsche both to  observe
that he not only places this interpretation upon the direction and outcome
of his own intellectual development, and to recognize what is fundamental
to it: the repudiation of 'all romantic mendacity', and its replacement by the
cultivation  of  the  intellectual  conscience  and  analytical,  critical  and
interpretive abilities of the 'free spirit' he was attempting to become  and
conjure among his readers by his own example.
Nietzsche  thus  saw  himself  here  as  having  turned  away  from  the
Wagnerian-Schopenhauerian Romanticism of The Birth of Tragedy (of which
he was explicitly critical along these very lines in a new preface to that work
also written in 1886, entitled ' Attempt at a Self-Criticism'). In doing so, and
partly as a way of doing so,  he had turned with all the self-discipline and
intellect  he  could  muster  in  an  analytical  direction,  replacing  art  with
science as his new paradigm of high spirituality. Thus, in the preface to the
second volume, he refers to the various instalments of Human, All Too Human
as 'precepts of health that may be recommended to the more spiritual natures
of the generation just coming up as a disciplina voluntatis [discipline of the
will]'  (n:P:2).  It is a  discipline as much needed today as it was needed by
Nietzsche himself and by 'the generation just coming up' in his own time.
This  in  part  answers  the  question  of  the  intended  audience  of  these
volumes. Nietzsche did not think of himself, either at this time or later, as
writing  primarily  for  professional  philosophers,  or  even  for  students  in
philosophy courses.  He  clearly  was moving  in what he conceived  to be a
philosophical direction; but he was writing first and foremost for inquiring
and adventuresome minds of sufficient sophistication to keep pace with him,
xvii
I N T R O DU CTION
whoever and wherever they may be- not only in academia but also among
the intelligent reading public. He hoped in particular to be able to reach the
better minds of the younger generation, who might be more receptive than
their elders to challenges to preconceived ideas and assumed values. Yet he
also had hopes of  having the sort of wider impact Voltaire and other firebrands of the Enlightenment had had a century earlier.
At the same time Nietzsche worried about what the likes of the Wagners
and the few colleagues who had not given up on him would think of it. For
a  time  he  even  considered  publishing  the  first  volume  anonymously  or
under a pseudonym. Human, All Too Human may not seem to us today to be
scandalously radical,  however provocative it may be on some topics; but at
the time Nietzsche rightly feared that it would be deeply offensive to many
of its readers - not in the ways The Birth of Tragedy had been to his fellow
philologists, but in an almost opposite way. Now it was those who had been
enamoured of Nietzsche the romantic who were offended, by his abandonment  of  Romanticism  in  favour  of  a  coldly  and  severely  analytical Naturalism- for which he sought the widest possible audience. Beyond the
circle of those who already knew of him, however,  Nietzsche need not have
worried about the  scandalousness of his new venture - for, to his dismay,
no one else paid the slightest attention. Even  today,  few recognize it as the
gold mine it is,  not only as an excellent way  of  becoming  acquainted with
his thinking,  but also for its wealth of ideas worth thinking about.
It does not do full justice to these ideas to characterize them as 'psychological',  let alone as  revolving around the 'discovery of the will to power'
(as  Kaufmann  suggests). Nietzsche  himself,  in his  1886 preface to the first
volume,  observes that  although  he may not have realized it at the time,  it
eventually dawned  upon him that 'it is the problem of order of rank' - that is,
the problem of  values and their revaluation and  ordering- 'of which we
may say it is our problem'; and that, to position themselves to address this
problem adequately, 'we free spirits' first have to become ' adventurers and
circumnavigators  of  that  inner  world  called  "man",  as  surveyors  and
[measurers] of that "higher" and  "one [above]  the other" that is  likewise
called "man"- penetrating everywhere, almost[!] without fear, disdaining
nothing, losing nothing,  asking everything, cleansing everything of what is
chance and accident in it and as it were thoroughly sifting it . .. ' (1:P7).
That is a fair characterization of what Nietzsche does in Human, All Too
Human; and it is in that sense that the term 'psychological' applies to  his task
and  way  of  going  about  it.  'Psychology'  in  his  time,  after  all,  was  not  a
discipline in its own right, separate and distinct from philosophy, but rather
was conceived both loosely and strictly as a part of it; and in Nietzsche's
hands it  retained  this  intimate  connection  with  philosophy  as he came to
understand  and  practice  it.  Philosophy  for  him  revolves  around  the
exploration  of  things  human,  and  is  first  and  foremost  the  attempt  to
comprehend them - even if that comprehension is not  an  end in itself.  It
prepares  the  way  for  the  further  comprehension  of  the  whole  complex
matter  of  value,  as  it  relates  to  issues  of  quality  and  worth in and  about
human  life,  in the  service  of  its  enhancement.  In Human,  All Too Human
xviii
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Nietzsche took (and in his prefaces saw himself as taking) major steps in that
direction. He had yet to learn to temper his new enthusiasm for the natural
sciences, to figure out how to revisit the perspectives relating to the arts and
culture he had known so well without becoming captive once again to them,
to supplement both with yet others and to develop the ability to make larger
interpretive  sense  of  our  humanity  in  the  light  of  this  multiplicity  of
perspectives upon it. But he was on his way.
This assessment of the place of Human, All Too Human in the context of
Nietzsche's larger intellectual development has the virtues of acknowledging
the great  differences  between  it (and  its  companion  volumes  in  the 'free
spirit' series) and his earlier writings, and also of coherently relating his later
writings to both. Many readers - and  interpreters - make the mistake of
regarding these 'free spirit' works as a kind of interlude between The Birth
of Tragedy and Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and of reading them- if at all- from
the perspective of his later writings,  in relation to which they are generally
found to pale by comparison, both rhetorically and philosophically. It would
make a good deal more sense to view his later writings in the perspective of
his 'free spirit' works, taking Human, All Too Human as one's point of departure, and regarding Zarathustra as an interlude between the last of them (the  first  four-part  version  of  The  Gay  Science)  and  the  continuation  of
Nietzsche's aphoristic works, beginning with Beyond Good and Evil and the
expanded  version  of  The  Gay Science  he  published  a  year later. For  the
continuities  between  them  are  strong,  even  if  Nietzsche's  arsenal  of
perspectives grows, his philosophical sophistication increases,  his rhetoric
sharpens and heats up, and his intellectual pendulum swings back from its
scientifically-oriented extreme point in the direction of his artistic and cultural
concerns and sensibility (moving subsequently in considerably shorter arcs
in the general vicinity of the centre of the spectrum they mark out).
This even applies to the organization of Human, All Too Human  and the
two later works that are not devoted to specific topics or figures, Beyond Good
and  Evil  and  Twilight  of  the  Idols.  Like  both  of  them,  the  first  version  of
Human, All Too Human does have  an organization,  in the  form  of the division of the volume into parts with headings. Interestingly enough, all three have the same number of major parts - nine - plus an epilogue. And there
is  a striking similarity among the  headings  as  well.  Each  starts  out with
sections on topics relating to philosophers and philosophy; each has a section
relating to morality, and another to religious and metaphysical matters; each
has  a section on social and political  matters,  and another on cultural  and
intellectual topics;  and  each,  at some point,  contains  a  collection  of oneliners on a variety of sensitive topics guaranteed to offend almost everyone.
To be sure,  the parallels are not exact; but they are close enough to warrant
the suggestion of a continuity of form - and in content there are not only
significant differences but also remarkable similarities. One might well ask
oneself in what ways Nietzsche's thinking changed on these matters from
his initial discussions of them in Human, All Too Human to Beyond Good and
Evil to Twilight, what his reasons may have been (if he does not make them
explicit)- and whether the changes were invariably for the better.
xix
INT R O D U C T I O N
The two parts of the second volume of Human, All Too Human were not
supplied with the same sorts of  headings,  or indeed with any subheadings
at all. Most of the aphorisms in them can easily be assigned to one or another
of those Nietzsche uses in the first volume,  however; for they chiefly range
over and fall into the same general topics. An examination of the list of these
topics makes it clear both that Human, All Too Human  is far from being as
formless as it is often taken to be,  and also that Nietzsche's interests include
but are not restricted to issues that are normally deemed 'philosophical'. The
first  (appropriately  enough),  'Of  First  and  Last  Things',  deals  with
metaphysical thinking - but in a curiously detached sort of way, more as a
phenomenon to be understood than a set of arguments to be engaged head
on. The same sort of  approach  is taken to  morality  in the second ('On the
History  of Moral Sensations'- Nietzsche's first go at what he came to  call
the 'genealogy of morals'); to religion in the third ('The Religious Life'); and
to art in the fourth ('From the  Souls  of Artists and Writers').  In each  case
Nietzsche is  proposing  that  we  make  the  experiment  of  looking  at  these
seemingly sublime things as human phenomena- experiences and activities
of human beings- asking what is going on when such things occur in human
life, and shifting the presumption from their sublimity to the suspicion that
their appearance of sublimity may well be deceiving.
In the next four  sections  Nietzsche  turns  his attention to the domain of
cultural, social and interpersonal  relationships  and types. There is more to
culture than  art  and literature; and he attempts to bring it  into  focus  in the
fifth section ('Tokens of Higher and Lower Culture'). Social institutions and
relationships are the logical next stop, in the sixth section ('Man in Society'),
with family matters coming next ('Woman and Child'), followed by political life (' A Glance at the State'). If in the first four sections he surveys things that claim some sort of transcendent significance, of the sort Hegel sought
to  express  in  his  characterization  of  their  domain  as  that  of  'absolute
spirituality', here Nietzsche surveys those things that flesh out what Hegel
had called 'the life of a people' on the level of its 'objective spirituality'. These
too are among the chief sorts of things in terms of which our humanity and
human meaning and worth are commonly conceived. If one asks what it is
that sets us apart from and above other creatures whose existence is merely
animal, and is not permitted to give a quick religious or metaphysical answer
appealing to transcendent principles and powers,  this is a fair inventory of
possible  answers.  That  is  the  larger  (and  genuinely  if  unconventionally
philosophical) point of these collections of reflections, many of which might
not appear to have any philosophical significance whatsoever.
In the final section Nietzsche turns to what he considers to be left after one
has considered all of these other dimensions of human life: what we are or
can be on our own, as individuals, within or by ourselves ('Man Alone with
Himself').  Later  he  would  add  another  item  to  the  first  four  on the  list,
belonging with them, but not yet as problematical in his eyes as he subsequently recognized it to be: scientific thinking, of the very sort he had become so enamoured of and reliant upon here. Like the glasses with which one may
be provided to deal with vision problems, and to which one may become so
XX
I N T R O D U C TI O N
accustomed that one ceases to be aware  of them, this sort of thinking can
come to be taken for granted beyond the point to which reliance upon it is
warranted.  To  his  great credit, Nietzsche  was  far  quicker  than  most  to
become  sensitive  to the  limitations  of  ways  of thinking to  which  he was
attracted - and then,  having done so,  to  get past  his disappointment with
them and ascertain the best uses that might be made of them, their limitations notwithstanding. In Human, All Too Human, however, his romance with the sciences was still young, and this process had yet to run its course.
The expression Nietzsche adopted to characterize the kind of thinker and
human being he conceived himself to have become '- or at any rate to have
been on the way to becoming- at the time of Human, All Too Human is that
which he features in its subtitle: 'free spirit', Freigeist. Human, All Too Human
is proclaimed in its subtitle to be 'A Book for Free Spirits'. Three years after
the publication of  its first instalment,  when Nietzsche published the first
version of The Gay Science, he had the following printed on the back cover:
'This  book  marks  the  conclusion  of  a  series  of  writings  by  FRIEDRICH
NIETZSCHE whose common goal it is to erect a new image and ideal of the free
spirit.' He then went on to list Human, All  Too Human and its  supplements
and sequels up to and including The Gay Science?
But this did not mark the end of Nietzsche's  attachment to the idea of the
'free spirit'. It reappears very significantly in Beyond Good and Evil,  as the
heading  of  the  second  part  of  the  book  in  which,  following  his  largely
critical first part 'On the Prejudices of Philosophers', he proceeds to set forth
a variety of his own ideas on a broad range of philosophical issues. And it
reappears again not only in his retrospective Ecce Homo, as one would expect,
but also in Twilight of the Idols, in a section bearing the heading 'My conception of freedom'.8 From first to last it is invoked to convey the double meaning of both liberation from things that have tended to hinder and hobble one, and of determination to undertake tasks requiring independence, strength,
courage  and  imagination.  Nietzschean  free  spirits  are  not  necessarily
philosophers;  but  Nietzschean  philosophers  are  necessarily  free  spirits.
Voltaire, for Nietzsche, was an exemplary free spirit, as the original dedication  of Human, All Too  Human  indicated:  'To Voltaire's memory, in commemoration  of  the  day  of  his  death,  30  May  q88.' His  example  would appear to have taught Nietzsche the erstwhile devoted disciple of Wagner
something he came to realize he badly needed to learn.
The 'free spirit' is 'a spirit that has become free', as Nietzsche emphasizes
in  his remarks  on  Human, All Too  Human  in Ecce Homo. In the things that
matter most, Rousseau was both right and wrong - right in observing that
people are 'everywhere in chains', but wrong in supposing them to be 'born
free'. True freedom of the spirit is something that is acquired-if at all- with
difficulty, and only by a few. Indeed, in Nietzsche's 1886 preface to the first
volume he even goes so far as to allow that he was obliged to invent the ' free
spirits' to whom the book is addressed, since " 'free spirits" of this kind do
not exist, did not exist' - although he says 'I had need of them', all the more
so  because he lacked the kind of actual companionship and comradeship
that people of this sort could provide. 'That free spirits of this kind could one
xxi
I N T R O D UC T I O N
day exist', on the other hand, and indeed that they will one day exist, he does
not doubt. 'I see them already coming', he optimistically asserts (1: P: 2); and
in any event the statement on the back cover of The Gay Science makes it clear
enough that he hoped and intended Human, All Too Human to speed the day,
by both precept and example.
But the same could be said for all of Nietzsche's aphoristic works, after as
well as before Thus Spoke Zarathustra. It is perhaps less true of Zarathustra
itself,  despite  Zarathustra's  repeated  proclamations  that  he  wants  no
disciples and wants  his companions to  think  for themselves; for it is hard
(though  not  impossible)  to  read  and  experience  Zarathustra  as  a  nontendentious  work.  And  it  likewise  is  perhaps  less  true  of  Nietzsche's polemical later works- against Wagner, against Christianity and even (in
On the Genealogy of Morals) against the kind of morality he considered to have
come to prevail in the Western world.  Polemics may have their place in the
liberation  of  fettered  spirits  from  the  shackles  that  bind  them,  and  so  in
making it possible for some people who might not otherwise do so to become
free spirits; but they are far from sufficient to complete the process, and can
easily subvert it- as the responses of many people to what they find in some
of Nietzsche illustrate well enough.
Unfortunately for Nietzsche's reception, his free-spirited side has all too
often been overshadowed and even eclipsed by the appearance of a much
more  impassioned  and  seemingly  dogmatic  side,  frightening  some  and
exciting others - for equally dubious reasons in either case. Neither the fact
that this appearance has been seen in markedly different (and incompatible)
ways, nor the objection  that it is only an appearance rather than the dark
side of the reality of his thought, has sufficed to keep it from long impeding
his interpretation and assessment. The best remedy for this predicament is
to direct attention to those works in which Nietzsche is engaged in his freespirited labours, from Human, All Too Human to The Gay Science and Beyond Good and Evil to Twilight of the Idols. This is not to expurgate him; for there is
plenty in each of these books to worry about and argue with, and much that
is all-too-human in him no less than in his targets. But in these volumes he
for the most part carries on in the manner of the kind of 'free spirit' he seeks
to evoke and encourage. If one would understand the sort of thing he has in
mind in speaking of philosophers and philosophy of the future as he would
have  them be,  one  would  do  well  to  begin - as he did - with  this  idea in
mind, as the presupposition of anything further that a Nietzschean kind of
philosophy might involve.
There is  no better  commentary in Nietzsche  on what  free-spiritedness
meant to him, as the idea took shape in and beyond Human, All Too Human,
than the paragraph with which he concludes the part of Beyond Good and Evil
entitled 'The Free Spirit'. It deserves to be read together with the prefaces to
the two volumes of Human, All Too Human he shortly went on to write. With
them  in  mind  one  can  turn  to Human, All  Too Human itself  and see  why
Nietzsche was not content to allow it to go unnoticed even after he had gone
on to publish a good  many  other things - and why there may be no better
introduction to his thought and thinking.
xxii
I N T R O D U CTION
At home, or at least having been guests, in many countries of the spirit;
having escaped again and again from the musty agreeable nooks into
which preference and prejudice, youth, origin, the accidents of people
and  books  or  even  exhaustion  from  wandering  seemed  to  have
banished  us;  full  of malice  against  the  lures  of  dependence  that  lie
hidden in honors, or money, or offices, or enthusiasms of the senses;
grateful even to need and vacillating sickness because they always rid
us from some rule and its 'prejudice,' grateful to god, devil, sheep, and
worm in us; curious to a vice, investigators to the point of cruelty, with
uninhibited fingers for the unfathomable, with teeth and stomachs for
the  most  indigestible,  ready  for  every  feat  that  requires  a  sense  of
acuteness  and  acute  senses,  ready  for  every  venture,  thanks  to  an
excess  of 'free  will,'  with fore- and  back-souls  into  whose  ultimate
intentions  nobody  can  look  so  easily,  with  fore- and  backgrounds
which no foot is likely to explore to the end; concealed under cloaks
of light, conquerors even if we look like heirs and prodigals, arrangers
and  collectors  from  morning  till  late,  misers  of  our  riches  and  our
crammed  drawers,  economical  in learning  and  forgetting,  inventive
in  schemas,  occasionally  proud  of tables  of  categories,  occasionally
pedants, occasionally night owls of work even in broad daylight; yes,
when  it  is  necessary  even  scarecrows  - and  today  it  is  necessary;
namely, insofar as  we  are born,  sworn, jealous friends of solitude,  of
our own  most  profound,  most  midnightly,  most middaily solitude;
that is the type of man we are, we free spirits! And perhaps you have
something of this, too, you that are coming? you new philosophers? -9
Notes
1  On the Genealogy of Morals/Ecce Homo, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York,  1967),
p. 283 ('Why I Write Such Good Books':  Human, All Too Human,  §71).
2  See, e.g., The  Gay Science,  trans. Walter Kaufmann  (New York,  1974),  §§108,  125
and 343·
3  Ecce Homo, p. 283
4  The Nietzsche Canon: A Publication History and Bibliography (Chicago,  1995).
5  In 1974  (see note 2).
6  Walter  Kaufmann,  Nietzsche:  Philosopher,  Psychologist,  Antichrist,  4th  edn.
(Princeton,  1974), pp.  157, 158.
7  The Gay Science, trans. Kaufmann, p. 30.
8  Twilight of the Idols, in The Portable Nietzsche, ed. and trans. Walter Kaufmann (New
York,  1954), 'Skirmishes of an Untimely Man', §39·
9  Trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York, 1966), §44.
xxiii
CHRONOLOGY
Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche born on 15 October in Rocken, in the
Prussian province of Saxony
His father dies (at the age of 36)
Attends the classics-oriented boarding-school Schulpforta; plays
the piano and composes
Enters  Bonn  University  to  study  classical  languages  and
literatures
Associate professor of classical philology (before even completing
his Ph.D.) at the Swiss university at Basel
Full professor at Basel; enlists as a medical orderly in the Franco
Prussian War,  contracting  serious illnesses
First book The Birth of Tragedy appears (and is met with scholarly
derision)- his only major classical studies publication
Publishes the first three Untimely Meditations, including the essays
On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Life and Schopenhauer
as Educator
Writes a fourth Meditation in homage to Wagner, but his enthusiasm for Wagner cools
The  first  volume  of  Human,  All  Too  Human  (638  aphorisms)
appears;  Wagner  sends  him  Parsifal,  and  their  estrangement
deepens
Resigns  (with pension) from his position at Basel, incapacitated
by health problems;  begins spending his summers in the Swiss
Engadine region, and his winters in northern Italy, living in boarding-houses
Writes  two  sequels  to  Human,  All  Too  Human,  subsequently
published  as  the  two  parts  of  its  second  volume  (another  758
aphorisms)
Publishes Daybreak (575 aphorisms); alternative periods of depression and exhilaration; first summer in Sils Maria, where the idea of 'eternal recurrence' comes to him
The  year  of  his  intense  but  short-lived  relationship  with  Lou
Salome, which ends badly; publishes the initial four-part version
of The Gay Science (342 aphorisms and reflections)
The  first  two  parts  of  Thus  Spoke Zarathustra  are  written  and
published;  estrangement  from  family  and  friends;  depression;
resolves against living in Germany; Wagner dies
xxiv
C H R O N OL O G Y
Completes and publishes the third part of Zarathustra; breaks with
his  sister  Elizabeth,  unable  to  endure  her  anti-Semitic,  pro
Teutonic'  fiancee  Bernard  Forster  (She  marries  him  the  next
year, to Nietzsche's disgust  and distress,  accompanying him to
Paraguay where he sought to found a Teutonic colony)
The  fourth  part  of  Zarathustra is  written,  but  is  only  privately
printed and circulated; condition worsens
Beyond Good and Evil (296 aphorisms and reflections in nine parts,
plus a poem ' Aftersong') is published; new editions of most pre
Zarathustra works are prepared and supplied with prefaces
1886---7
An expanded second edition of The Gay Science is prepared and
published,  with  a  new  preface  and  fifth  part  consisting  of  41
additional reflections, and an appendix of poetry', 'Songs of Prince
Vogelfrei'
On the Genealogy of Morals appears, consisting of a preface and
three 'essays' (of 17, 25 and 28 numbered sections, respectively);
completes orchestral score for Hymnus an das Leben; begins working on magnus opus, to be called The Will to Power
The  Case  of  Wagner is  published;  and  Twilight  of  the  Idols,  The
Antichrist,  Nietzsche  contra  Wagner,  Dionysian  Dithyrambs  (a
collection  of  poems)  and  Ecce Homo are all  written;  The  Will  to
Power  project  is  dropped,  in  favour  of  a  projected  four-part
Revaluation of All Values; condition deteriorates
Collapses in early January in Turin,  at  the age of 44  (never  recovers, living his final eleven years in invalid insanity in the care of  his  mother  and  sister);  Twilight  of  the  Idols  is  published  in
January
First public edition of the fourth part of Zarathustra appears
Sister returns  from Paraguay,  and - under  the name Elizabeth
Forster-Nietzsche- assists their mother in the management of her
brother's affairs
The Antichrist and Nietzsche Contra Wagner are published
Mother  dies,  leaving  complete control  of his  care - and  of  his
literary estate- to Elizabeth, who exploits his growing fame and
fosters the assimilation of his thought to right-extremist political
purposes during the next four decades
H)OO
Nietzsche dies, on 25 August, in Weimar
1')01
Sister publishes an arrangement of selections from his notebooks
of 1883--8 under the title The Will to Power, and in his name
1')08
Ecce Homo is finally published
191Q-11  First edition of Nietzsche's collected works is published under the
supervision of Elizabeth - including a greatly expanded edition
of The Will to Power
R.S.
XXV
FURTHER READING
Intellectual background
The history of philosophy has few chapters as rich and varied  as  that of
German (or Central European) philosophy from Kant to Nietzsche. A superb
survey  of German  philosophy  up  to  and  including Kant  is  Lewis  White
Beck's Early German  Philosophy: Kant and his Predecessors (Cambridge, MA,
1969). The next chapters of  the story are well told by Frederick C. Beiser in
The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte (Cambridge,  MA,
1987); G. A.  Kelly in Idealism, Politics and History: Sources of Hegelian Thought
(Cambridge,  1969)  and  Herbert  Schnadelbach  in  Philosophy  in  Germany
1831-1933 (Cambridge, 1984).
Two classic studies of German philosophy in the nineteenth century, both
first published in 1941, are Herbert Marcuse's Reason and Revolution: Hegel
and the Rise of Social Theory (Boston,  1960)  and  Karl Lowith's From Hegel  to
Nietzsche:  The Revolution  in  Nineteenth-Century Thought (New York,  1964).
More  recent  studies  include  Walter  Kaufmann's  From  Shakespeare  to
Existentialism (Garden City, NY, 1959), Maurice Mandelbaum's History, Man
and  Reason  (Baltimore,  1971),  and Robert  Solomon's From  Rationalism  to
Existentialism (New York,  1972).
The two most important figures in Nietzsche's intellectual life and development were Arthur Schopenhauer and Richard Wagner. Useful studies of Schopenhauer  include  Patrick  Gardiner's  Schopenhauer  (Baltimore,  1963),
D. W. Hamlyn's Schopenhauer (London, 1980) and Christopher Janaway's
Self and  World  in  Schopenhauer  (Oxford,  1989).  On  Wagner,  see  Ernest
Newman's four-volume biography The Life of Richard Wagner (New York,
1933-46 ), and Geoffrey Skelton's Wagner at Bayreuth (London and New York,
1976).  The  many  studies  of  the  Nietzsche-Wagner  relationship  include
Dietrich  Fischer-Dieskau's  Wagner  and  Nietzsche  (New  York,  1976)  and
Frederick Love's The Young Nietzsche and the Wagnerian Experience (Chapel
Hill, 1963). Roger Hollinrake discusses all three of them in Nietzsche, Wagner
and the Philosophy of Pessimism (London, 1982).
Nietzsche himself published essays on both Schopenhauer and Wagner,
shortly before Human, All Too Human, although they both reveal much more
about  the  Nietzsche  of  that  period  of  his  life  than  they  do  about
Schopenhauer and Wagner themselves. They are the third and fourth of his
Untimely Meditations (Cambridge,  1983), and bear  the titles 'Schopenhauer
as Educator'  and 'Richard Wagner in Bayreuth'. Late in his productive life
xxvi
F U R T H E R   R E A DI N G
(though only fifteen years after the appearance of the latter essay), Nietzsche
also published two short books as polemically critical of Wagner as his early
essay  had  been  appreciative:  The Case of  Wagner  (New  York,  1967) and
Nietzsche  Contra  Wagner,  included  in  Walter  Kaufmann's  The  Portable
Nietzsche (New York, 1954).
Nietzsche's life
Perhaps  the  best  recent  biography  of  Nietzsche  is  Ronald  Hayman's
Nietzsche:  A  Critical Life  (New  York,  1980).  Another  useful  and  shorter
biography  is  R.  J.  Hollingdale's  Nietzsche  (London,  1965).  Kaufmann's
Nietzsche:  Philosopher,  Psychologist,  Antichrist  (Princeton,  1950;  Princeton,
1974),  a  kind  of  intellectual  biography,  is  the  book  that  rehabilitated
Nietzsche for  the post-World War  II  generation  in  the  English-speaking
world, and remains one of the most accessible introductions to his life and
thought.
Here again, Nietzsche himself has also supplied a contribution that cannot go unmentioned, even if it is no more reliable and no less tendentious than  his  writings  on  Schopenhauer  and  Wagner.  It  is  his  intellectualautobiographical Ecce Homo (New York, 1967), to which he gave the subtitle
'How One Becomes What One Is'. It is the last book he completed before his
collapse. Considered by some to be all too clearly indicative of his incipient
insanity, it is regarded by others as a work of profound significance. In any
event, it is well worth reading.
Nietzsche's writings
Most  of  Nietzsche's  publications  have  been  translated  into  English  in  a
number of versions, the best of which have long been generally considered
to  be  the  translations  made  by  Walter  Kaufmann  and  R.  J.  Hollingdale
(sometimes in collaboration). A monumental critical edition of his writings
in German has been published by De Gruyter, edited by Giorgio Colli and
Mazzino  Montinari;  and  a  translation  project  intended  to  result  in  an
English-language counterpart has now begun, under the editorship of Ernst
Behler, at Stanford University Press.
Other writings of Nietzsche's that will be of particular interest to readers
of the present work certainly include the two similar works following it in
what  Nietzsche  came  to  think  of  and  refer  to  as  his  'free  spirit'  series:
Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality (Cambridge, 1982), also translated by Hollingdale; and The Gay Science (New York,  1974), translated by Kaufmann.  Nietzsche's earlier writings are well worth consulting as well,
for the indications they provide of the concerns which shaped the direction
of his thinking and efforts in this series of aphoristic volumes. Chief among
them are his first book (1872), The Birth of Tragedy (New York, 1967), translated by Kaufmann, and a series of four essays (first published in the years 1873-6)  Nietzsche  gathered  together  in  1886  under  the  title  Untimely
Meditations (Cambridge, 1983), translated by Hollingdale. They also include
xxvii
F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G
a draft o f  a n  important early essay Nietzsche never finished o r  published,
which  however  reveals the  starkly  naturalistic picture  of the human condition  that  was  a  part  of his  point  of departure:  'On  Truth and  Lies  in  a Nonmoral Sense' (1873), translated by Daniel Breazeale and included in his
volume Nietzsche, Philosophy and Truth (Atlantic Highlands,  NJ, 1979).
Following his 'free spirit'  series,  Nietzsche turned his attention to a very
different sort of project: his extraordinary four-part literary-philosophical
experiment  and  masterpiece,  Thus  Spoke Zarathustra  (1883-5),  translated
(among  others)  by  both  Kaufmann  (in  The  Portable  Nietzsche)  and
Hollingdale (Harmondsworth, 1961). He then  (1886) returned to the publication of volumes of a somewhat aphoristic nature, beginning with Beyond Good and  Evil,  which  again has  been  translated by both  Kaufmann (New
York,  1966)  and  Hollingdale  (Harmondsworth,  1973),  and  an  expanded
version of The Gay Science. His next book, On the Genealogy of Morals (1887),
translated by Kaufmann and Hollingdale together  (New York, 1967), joins
his aphoristic style to a  three-essay  format with a more specific focus than
any of his previous aphoristic works (published in 1994, trans. Carol Diethe,
edited by Keith  Ansell-Pierson). In the final year before  his collapse (1888)
Nietzsche not only published the two polemics against Wagner and the autobiographical Ecce Homo mentioned  above, but also a polemical critique of Christianity,  The Antichrist,  and a  final  volume  of  aphorisms  more in the
tradition of Human, All Too Human, which (parodying Wagner's fourth Ring
opera) he called Gotzendiimmerung, or Twilight of the Idols. Both of these last
works have been translated by Kaufmann (in The Portable Nietzsche) and also
by Hollingdale (Harmondsworth, 1¢8).
Which of these many things should one read after Human, All Too Human?
That depends upon one's interests. If one is primarily interested in matters
relating  to  morality,  one might look first at Daybreak, then at the fifth and
ninth parts of Beyond Good and Evil and then at On the Genealogy of Morals.
On religion,  Daybreak again is a good sequel, together with the sections of
The Gay Science dealing with God and religion, the third part of Beyond Good
and Evil and  The Antichrist. On the  many philosophical topics relating to
knowledge, our world and ourselves, one might look back to the early essay
'On Truth  and  Lies',  and  ahead  to  The Gay Science,  the first two parts  of
Beyond Good and Evil and Twilight of the Idols; and one might also take a look
at the selections from Nietzsche's notebooks from the 188os published under
the title The Will to Power, translated by Kaufmann and Hollingdale (New
York,  1967).  And for an indication of Nietzsche's thinking with respect to
the  enhancement  of  life  and  the  possibility  of  a  'higher  humanity'  he
discerns  along  with the  'all  too human'  tendencies  he examines here and
subsequently, one might look back to his essay 'Schopenhauer as Educator'
(the third of his Untimely Meditations) as well as to Thus Spoke Zarathustra.
Nietzsche's thought
Nietzsche has been so influential in so many ways during the course of the
twentieth  century,  and  has  been  so  variously  interpreted;  that  no  one
xxviii
F U R T H E R   R E A DI N G
account can be considered authoritative. He has been claimed as originator,
anticipator,  inspiration  and  kindred  spirit  by  fascists  and  humanists,
existentialists  and  deconstructionists,  critical  theorists  and  analytical
philosophers,  and by more artists,  writers and composers than any other
figure in the history of philosophy (at least since Plato). Both his admirers
and his critics can make persuasive arguments for and against him; but they
all too often fail to take the trouble to read him thoroughly and attentively
enough to understand him - or at any rate to  earn the right to make their
claims.
Walter  Kaufmann's  classic  study  Nietzsche  (mentioned  above)  offers  a
readable  interpretation of  Nietzsche's  thought along  humanistic  existentialist and pragmatist lines. Another early study of enduring value, which explores Nietzsche's thought more systematically, is George Morgan's What
Nietzsche Means (Cambridge, MA, 1941; New York, 1965). Useful interpretations  in  the  analytic  tradition  include  Arthur  Danto's  Nietzsche  as Philosopher  (New  York,  1965),  Alexander  Nehamas's  Nietzsche:  Life  as
Literature (Cambridge,  MA,  1985), Maudemarie Clark's Nietzsche on Truth
and Philosophy (Cambridge, 1990), and Richard Schacht's Nietzsche (London
and New York,  1983) and Making Sense of Nietzsche (Urbana and Chicago,
1995).  A  sampling  of  interpretations  along  post-structuralist  and  deconstructionist lines may be found in David  Allison's  collection  The New Nietzsche:  Contemporary  Styles of Interpretation  (New  York,  1977).  Helpful
recent studies of various aspects of Nietzsche's thought relating to matters
he discusses in Human, All Too Human include Erich Heller's The Importance
of Nietzsche (Chicago, 1988), Peter Bergmann's Nietzsche: The Last Antipolitical
German (Bloomington, IN, 1987) and Lester Hunt's Nietzsche and the Origin
of Virtue (London, 1991).
R.S.
xxix
V O L U M E   O N E
CONTENTS
PREFACE  5
1  O F  FIRST A N D  L A ST  THI NGS  1 2
2  O N  THE  H ISTORY  O F  THE M O R A L  S E N SATIONS  ) 1
3  THE R E L I G I O U S   LIFE  60
4  F R O M   THE  S O U L S   OF  A RT I STS  A N D  WRITERS  80
5  T O K E N S  OF  H I G H E R  A N D  L O W E R  CULTURE  1 07
6  M A N  I N  SOCI ETY  1 36
7  W O M A N  A N D  C H I L D   1 50
8  A  G L A N C E  AT  THE STATE  1 6 1
9  M A N  A LO N E  WITH H I M S E L F   1 79
A M O NG  F R I E N D S :   A N  E P I L O G U E   205
PREFACE
I  have  been  told  often  enough,  and  always  with an  expression  of  great
surprise,  that all my  writings,  from  the  Birth of  Tragedy* to  the  most  recently published Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future, t have something that distinguishes  them  and  unites  them  together:  they  all  of  them,  I  have
been given to understand,  contain snares and nets for unwary birds and
in effect a persistent invitation to the overturning of habitual evaluations
and valued  habits.  What? Everything only- human,  all  too  human? It  is
with this sigh  that  one emerges from my writings,  not without a kind of
reserve and mistrust even in regard to morality, not a little tempted and
emboldened, indeed, for once to play the advocate of the worst things: as
though they have  perhaps been only the worst  slandered?  My writings
have  been  called  a  schooling  in  suspicion,  even  more  in  contempt,  but
fortunately also in  courage,  indeed in audacity.  And in  fact I myself do
not believe that anyone  has  ever before looked into  the  world  with an
equally  profound  degree  of  suspicion,  and not merely as an  occasional
devil's advocate,  but,  to  speak  theologically,  just as much as an enemy
and indicter of God; and anyone who could divine something of the consequences  that  lie  in  that  profound  suspiciousness,  something  of  the fears and  frosts of  the  isolation  to  which  that  unconditional disparity of
view  condemns  him  who  is  infected  with  it,  will  also  understand  how
often, in an effort to recover from myself, as it were to induce a temporary
self-forgetting,  I have sought shelter in this or that - in some piece of admiration  or  enmity  or  scientificality  or  frivolity  or  stupidity;  and  why, where  I could  not find what I  needed,  I had artificially  to  enforce,  falsify
and invent a suitable fiction for myself (- and what else have poets ever
done? and to  what end does art exist in the world at all?).  What I  again
and again  needed  most for my  cure and  self-restoration,  however,  was
the belief that  I  was  not thus  isolated,  not  alone  in  seeing as  I  did - an
enchanted  surmising  of  relatedness  and  identity  in  eye  and  desires,  a
reposing  in  a  trust  of  friendship,  a  blindness  in  concert  with  another
without  suspicion  or  question-marks,  a  pleasure  in  foregrounds,  surfaces,  things close and closest, in everything possessing colour,  skin and apparitionality. Perhaps in this regard I might be reproached with having
employed a certain amount of 'art', a certain amount of false-coinage: for
•  Birth of Tragedy:  Nietzsche's first  published book (187z)
t  Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future: the subtitle of Beyond Good and Evil, published in 1886
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
example,  that  I  knowingly-willfully  closed  my  eyes  before  Schopenhauer' s" blind will to morality at  a  time when I was  already  sufficiently clearsighted about morality; likewise that I deceived myself over Richard
Wagner'st incurable romanticism, as though it were a beginning and not
an  end;  likewise  over  the  Greeks,  likewise  over  the  Germans  and  their
future - and perhaps a whole long list could be made of such likewises?
Supposing,  however,  that  all  this  were  true  and  that  I  was  reproached
with  it  with  good  reason,  what  do  you  know,  what could you  know,  of
how  much  cunning  in  self-preservation,  how  much  reason  and  higher
safeguarding, is contained in such self-deception- or of how much falsity
I shall require if I am to continue to permit myself the luxury of my truthfulness? . . .  Enough,  I am  still  living;  and  life  is,  after all,  not  a product  of morality: it  wants deception,  it lives on deception  . . .  but  there  you  are,  I
am already off again,  am I  not,  and doing what I have always done,  old
immoralist  and  bird-catcher  that  I  am  - speaking  unmorally,  extramorally,  'beyond  good  and evil'?-
-Thus when I needed to I once also invented for myself the 'free spirits' to
whom this  melancholy-valiant book with the title Human,  All Too Human
is dedicated:  'free spirits' of this kind do not exist, did not exist- but, as I
have said, I had need of them at  that time if I was to keep in good spirits
while surrounded by ills (sickness,  solitude,  unfamiliar places, acedia,  inactivity):  as brave  companions  and familiars  with  whom  one can  laugh and chatter  when  one  feels like laughing and chattering,  and whom one
can  send to  the Devil  when  they become tedious - as compensation for
the  friends I lacked.  That  free spirits of this  kind could one day exist,  that
our Europe will have such active and audacious fellows among its sons of
tomorrow  and  the  next  day,  physically present and  palpable and not,  as
in  my  case,  merely  phantoms  and  hermit's  phantasmagoria:  I  should
wish to be the  last to doubt it .  I see them already coming, slowly,  slowly;
and  perhaps I  shall  do  something  to  speed  their coming  if  I describe  in
advance under what vicissitudes,  upon what paths,  I see them coming?--
One  may conjecture  that a  spirit  in  whom  the type  'free spirit' will one
day become ripe and sweet to the point of perfection has had its decisive
experience in a great liberation and that previously it was all the more a fettered  spirit and  seemed  to  be  chained  for  ever  to  its  pillar  and corner.
What fetters the fastest? What bends are all but unbreakable? In the case
of men of a high and select kind they will be their duties: that reverence
proper to youth, that reserve and delicacy before all that is honoured and
•  Schopenhauer: Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-t86o),  the  philosopher,  of whom Nietzsche
was in his youth a disciple (see the essay,  'Schopenhauer as Educator'  in the Untimely Meditations)
t  Richard Wagner (t8tJ-8J), the composer and dramatist who was, like Schopenhauer, an
object of the youthful  Nietzsche's veneration (see the essay 'Richard Wagner in Bayreuth' in
the Untimely Meditations)
PREFACE
revered  from  of old,  that  gratitude  for  the  soil  out  of which  they have
grown,  for  the  hand  which  led  them,  for  the  holy  place  where  they
learned to worship- their supreme moments themselves will fetter them
the fastest, lay upon them the most enduring obligation. The great liberation comes for those who are thus fettered suddenly, like the shock of an earthquake:  the  youthful  soul  is  all  at  once  convulsed,  torn  loose,  torn
away - it  itself does not  know  what is happening.  A drive and impulse
rules and masters it like a command; a will and desire awakens to go off,
anywhere,  at  any  cost;  a  vehement  dangerous  curiosity  for  an  undiscovered world flames and flickers in all its senses. 'Better to die than to go on  living here' - thus  responds  the  imperious  voice and temptation: and
this  'here',  this  'at  home'  is  everything it  had  hitherto  loved! A sudden
terror  and  suspicion  of  what  it  loved,  a  lightning-bolt  of  contempt  for
what it called 'duty',  a rebellious,  arbitrary, volcanically erupting desire
for  travel,  strange  places,  estrangements,  coldness,  soberness,  frost,  a
hatred of love,  perhaps a desecrating blow and glance backwards to where
it formerly loved and worshipped,  perhaps a hot blush of shame at what
it  has  just done and at  the same  time an exultation  that it  has  done it,  a
drunken,  inwardly  exultant  shudder  which  betrays  that  a  victory  has
been  won - a victory?  over what?  over  whom?  an  enigmatic,  questionpacked,  questionable victory,  but  the first victory nonetheless:  such bad and painful things are part of the history of the great liberation. It is at the
same time a sickness that can destroy the man who has it,  this first outbreak of strength and will to  self-determination,  to  evaluating on  one's own account, this will to free will: and how much sickness is expressed in
the wild experiments and singularities through which the liberated prisoner  now  seeks  to  demonstrate  his  mastery  over  things!  He  prowls cruelly around with  an unslaked lasciviousness; what he captures has to
expiate the perilous tension of his pride; what excites him he tears apart.
With  a  wicked  laugh  he  turns  round  whatever  he  finds  veiled  and
through some sense of  shame  or  other  spared and pampered: he puts  to
the test what these things  look like when  they are reversed. It is an act of
willfulness,  and  pleasure in willfulness,  if  now  he  perhaps bestows his
favour on  that  which  has  hitherto  had  a  bad reputation  - if,  full of  inquisitiveness and the desire to tempt and experiment,  he creeps around the things most forbidden.  Behind all his toiling and weaving- for he is
restlessly and aimlessly on his way as if in a desert- stands the questionmark of a more and more perilous curiosity.  'Can all values not be turned round? and is good perhaps evil? and God only an invention and finesse
of the Devil? Is everything perhaps in the last resort false? And if we are
deceived, are we not for that very reason also deceivers? must we not be
deceivers?' - such thoughts as these tempt him and lead him on, even further away, even further down. Solitude encircles and embraces him, ever more  threatening,  suffocating,  heart-tightening,  that  terrible  goddess
and mater saeva cupidinum .. - but who today knows what solitude is? . . .
•  mater saeva cupidinum: wild mother of the passions
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
From this morbid  isolation,  from the desert  of these years of temptation
and experiment, it is still a long road to that tremendous overflowing certainty and  health  which  may not  dispense  even  with  wickedness,  as a means  and  fish-hook  of  knowledge,  to  that  mature  freedom  of  spirit
which  is  equally  self-mastery  and  discipline  of  the  heart  and  permits
access to many and contradictory modes  of thought- to that  inner spaciousness and indulgence of superabundance which excludes the danger that the spirit  may  even  on its own road perhaps lose itself and become
infatuated and remain seated intoxicated in some corner or other, to that
superfluity of formative, curative, moulding and restorative forces which
is  precisely the  sign of great health,  that  superfluity which  grants  to  the
free  spirit  the  dangerous  privilege  of  living  experimentally and  of  being
allowed  to  offer  itself  to  adventure:  the  master's  privilege  of  the  free
spirit! In between there  may lie long  years of convalescence, years full of
variegated,  painfully  magical  transformations  ruled  and led  along  by  a
tenacious will to health which  often  ventures to clothe and disguise itself
as health already achieved.  There is a midway condition which a man of
such  a  destiny  will  not  be  able  to  recall  without  emotion:  it  is  characterized by a pale, subtle happiness of light and sunshine, a feeling of birdlike freedom,  bird-like altitude, bird-like exuberance, and a third thing in which curiosity is united with a tender contempt. A 'free-spirit'- this cool
expression does  one  good  in every condition,  it is almost  warming.  One
lives no longer in the fetters of love and hatred, without yes, without no,
near or  far as one wishes,  preferably slipping away, evading,  fluttering
off,  gone  again,  again flying aloft; one is spoiled, as everyone is who has
at some time seen a tremendous number of things beneath him- and one
becomes  the  opposite  of  those  who  concern  themselves  with  things
which  have nothing to do with  them.  Indeed,  the free spirit henceforth
has to s:lo only with things - and how many things! - with which he is no
longer concerned . . .
A  step  further in  convalescence:  and  the free  spirit  again draws near to
life- slowly, to be sure,  almost reluctantly,  almost mistrustfully.  It again
grows  warmer  around  him,  yellower,  as it  were;  feeling and feeling  for
others  acquire depth, warm breezes of all kind blow across him.  It  seems
to him as if his eyes are only now open to what is close at hand. He is astonished and sits  silent:  where had he been? These close and closest things: how changed they seem!  what bloom and magic they have acquired! He
looks back gratefully- grateful to his wandering, to his hardness and selfalienation,  to  his  viewing  of  far  distances  and  bird-like  flights  in  cold heights.  What a  good  thing he had  not always stayed  'at  home',  stayed
'under  his  own roof  like a  delicate  apathetic  loafer!  He  had  been  beside
himself:  no  doubt of  that.  Only now  does he see  himself- and  what  surprises  he  experiences  as  he  does  so!  What  unprecedented  shudders!
PREFACE
What happiness even in the weariness,  the old  sickness,  the relapses of
the convalescent! How he loves to sit sadly still,  to spin out patience, to lie
in  the  sun!  Who  understands  as  he  does  the  happiness  that  comes  in
winter,  the spots  of sunlight on the wall! They are the most grateful animals in the world,  also the most modest,  these convalescents and lizards again half turned towards life: - there are some among them who allow
no day  to pass  without  hanging  a little  song  of  praise on  the hem  of its
departing robe. And,  to speak seriously:  to become sick in the manner of
these  free spirits,  to remain  sick for a long time and then,  slowly,  slowly,
to become healthy, by which I mean 'healthier',  is a fundamental cure for
all pessimism (the cancerous sore and inveterate vice,  as is well known,  of
old idealists and inveterate liars) .  There is wisdom,  practical  wisdom,  in
for a long  time  prescribing even health  for oneself only in small doses. -
At that time it may finally happen that,  under the sudden illumination of
a still stressful,  still changeable health,  the free,  ever freer  spirit begins to
unveil  the  riddle  of  that  great  liberation  which  had  until  then  waited
dark,  questionable,  almost untouchable in his memory. If he has for long
hardly dared  to ask himself:  'why so apart?  so alone?  renouncing everything I once reverenced? renouncing reverence itself?  why this hardness, this suspiciousness,  this hatred for your own virtues?' - now he dares to
ask  it  aloud  and  hears  in  reply  something  like  an  answer.  'You  shall
become  master  over  yourself,  master  also  over  your  virtues.  Formerly
they  were  your masters; but they must be only  your instruments beside
other instruments.  You  shall get control over your For and Against and
learn how to display first one and then the other in accordance with  your
higher  goal.  You  shall  learn  to  grasp  the  sense  of  perspective  in  every
val ue judgement - the displacement,  distortion and merely apparent teleology of horizons  and whatever else pertains to perspectivism;  also the quantum of stupidity that  resides  in antitheses of values and the whole
intellectual loss which every For,  every Against costs us.  You shall learn
to grasp  the necessary  injustice in  every For and Against,  injustice as inseparable from life, life itself as conditioned by the sense of perspective and its inj ustice. You shall above all see with your own eyes where injustice is
always at its greatest:  where life has developed at its smallest,  narrowest,
neediest,  most incipient and yet cannot avoid taking itself as the goal and
measure of things and for the sake  of  its own  preservation  secretly and
meanly and  ceaselessly crumbling  away  and  calling  into  question  the
higher,  greater, richer - you shall see with your own eyes the problem of
order of rank,  and how power and right and spaciousness of  perspective
grow into the heights together. You shall' - enough: from now on the free
spirit knows what 'you shall' he has obeyed,  and he also knows what he
now can, what only now he - may do . . .
H U M A N ,  A L L  TOO  H U M A N
This is how the free spirit  elucidates to himself that enigma of liberation,
and  inasmuch  as  he  generalizes  his  own  case  ends  by  adjudicating  on
what  he has  experienced  thus.  'What  has  happened  to me',  he  says  to
himself, 'must happen to everyone in whom a task wants to become incarnate  and  "come  into  the  world".' The  secret  force and  necessity  of this task  will  rule  among  and  in  the  individual  facets  of  his  destiny like  an
unconscious pregnancy - long before he has caught sight of this task itself
or  knows  its  name.  Our  vocation  commands  and  disposes  of  us  even
when  we  do  not  yet  know  it;  it  is  the  future  that  regulates  our  today.
Given it is the problem of order of rank of which we may say it is our problem,
we  free  spirits:  it  is only  now,  at  the midday of  our life,  that we understand  what  preparations,  bypaths,  experiments,  temptations,  disguises the problem  had  need  of before it  was allowed to rise  up  before  us,  and
how  we  first  had  to  experience  the  most  manifold  and  contradictory
states of joy and distress in soul and body, as adventurers and circumnavigators of that inner world called 'man', as surveyors and guagers of that
'higher' and  'one upon the other' that is likewise called 'man'- penetrating  everywhere,  almost  without  fear,  disdaining nothing,  losing  nothing,  asking  everything,  cleansing  everything  of  what  is  chance  and accident in it and as it were thoroughly siftin,g it- until at last we had the
right  to  say,  we  free  spirits:  'Here - a  new problem! Here a  long ladder
upon  whose  rungs  we ourselves have  sat  and climbed - which we  ourselves  have  at  some  time been!  Here a  higher,  a  deeper,  a  beneath-us,  a tremendous  long  ordering,  an  order  of  rank,  which  we  see:  here - our
problem!' --
- No  psychologist  or  reader  of  signs  will  have a  moment's  difficulty  in
recognizing  to  what  stage  in  the  evolution  just  described  the  present
book belongs (or has been placed - ). But where today are there psychologists? In France,  certainly;  perhaps in Russia; definitely not in Germany.
There is no lack  of  reasons  as to why the Germans of today could  even
regard this fact as redounding to their honour:  an ill fate for one who in
this  matter is by  nature  and  attainment un-Gerrnan!  This  German  book,
which  has  known  how  to  find  its  readers  in  a  wide  circle  of  lands  and
peoples- it has been on its way for about ten years- and must be capable
of some  kind  of music and  flute-player's art  by which  even coy foreign
ears are  seduced  to listen - it is precisely in Germany that this book has
been read most carelessly and heard the worst: why is that?- 'It demands
too much',  has been the reply,  'it  addresses itself to people who are not
oppressed by uncouth duties, it wants refined and experienced senses,  it
needs  superfluity,  superfluity  of  time,  of  clarity  in  heart  and  sky,  of
otium• in the most audacious sense: - all of them good things that we Ger-
•  otium:  leisure,  idleness;  in  Catullus'  usage,  it denotes a vice or condition of ennui.
PREFACE
mans  of today  do not  have  and  therefore  also  cannot  give'. - After  so
courteous a reply my philosophy advises me to keep silent and to ask no
more questions;  especially as  in  certain cases,  as  the  saying has  it,  one
remains a philosopher only by- keeping silent.
Nice
Spring 1 886
1 1
OF  FIRST
AND
LAST THINGS
Chemistry of concepts and sensations.  - Almost all the problems of philosophy once  again  pose the same form of question as they did  two thousand years ago: how can something originate in its opposite, for example rationality in irrationality,  the  sentient in  the  dead,  logic in  unlogic,  disinterested contemplation in covetous desire,  living for  others  in  egoism, truth  in  error?  Metaphysical  philosophy  has  hitherto  surmounted  this
difficulty by denying that the one originates  in  the  other and  assuming
for the  more highly valued thing a miraculous source in the very kernel
and  being  of  the  'thing  in  itself'.* Historical  philosophy,  on  the  other
hand,  which  can  no  longer  be  separated  from  natural  science,  the
youngest of all philosophical methods,  has discovered in individual cases
(and this will probably be the result in  every case) that there are  no opposites, except in the customary exaggeration of popular or metaphysical interpretations, and that a  mistake in reasoning lies at the bottom of this
antithesis:  according  to  this  explanation  there  exists,  strictly  speaking,
neither an unegoistic action nor completely disinterested contemplation;
both  are  only  sublimations,  in  which  the  basic  element  seems  almost to
have dispersed  and reveals  itself only under the most painstaking observation. All we require, and what can be given us only now the individual sciences have attained  their  present level,  is a chemistry of the  moral,  religious and aesthetic conceptions and sensations,  likewise of all  the agitations we experience within ourselves in cultural and social intercourse, and indeed even when we are alone: what if this chemistry would end up
by revealing that in this domain too the most glorious colours are derived
from  base,  indeed  from  despised  materials?  Will  there  be  many  who
desire  to pursue  such researches? Mankind likes to put questions of origins and beginnings out of its mind: must one not be almost inhuman to detect in oneself a contrary inclination? -
Family failing of philosophers. - All philosophers have the common failing
of starting out  from man as he is now and thinking they  can reach  their
goal through an analysis of him.  They involuntarily think of 'man' as an
aeterna veritas, t  as  something  that  remains  constant  in  the  midst  of all
flux,  as  a  sure  measure  of  things.  Everything  the  philosopher  has
•  thing-in-itself:  Kant's  term  for  objects  as  they  are  independently  of  our  knowledge  of
them, contrasted (see section 10) with 'appearances', objects considered as conforming to our
modes of knowing them
t  aeterna veritas: something everlastingly true
OF  FIRST  A N D   LAST THINGS
declared  about man is, however,  at bottom no more  than a testimony as
to the man of a  very limited period  of time.  Lack of historical sense is the
family failing of all philosophers;  many,  without being aware of it,  even
take  the  most recent manifestation of man,  such as has arisen under the
impress  of  certain  religions,  even  certain  political  events,  as  the  fixed
form from which  one  has  to  start  out.  They  will  not learn  that man  has
become,  that  the  faculty  of  cognition  has become;  while  some  of them
would have  it  that  the  whole  world  is  spun  out  of  this  faculty  of cognition.  Now,  everything  essential  in  the  development  of  mankind  took place  in primeval times,  long before the four thousand years we more or
less know about; during these years mankind may well not have altered
very much.  But the philosopher here sees  'instincts'  in man as he now is
and assumes that these belong to the unalterable facts of mankind and to
that extent could provide a key to the understanding of the world in general:  the whole  of teleology is constructed by  speaking of the  man of the last  four  millennia  as  of  an eternal man  towards  whom  all  things  in  the
world have had a natural relationship from the time he began. But everything  has become:  there  are  no eternal facts, just as there  are  no  absolute truths.  Consequently what is needed from now on is historical philosophizing, and with it the virtue of modesty.
Estimation of unpretentious  truths.  - It  is  the  mark  of  a  higher  culture  to
value  the  little  unpretentious  truths  which  have  been  discovered  by
means of rigorous method more highly than the errors  handed  down by
metaphysical  and  artistic  ages  and  men,  which  blind  us  and  make  us
happy.  At  first  the  former  are  regarded  with  scorn,  as  though  the  two
things could  not  possibly  be  accorded  equal  rights:  they  stand  there  so
modest, simple, sober, so apparently discouraging, while the latter are so
fair,  splendid,  intoxicating,  perhaps indeed enrapturing.  Yet that which
has been attained by laborious struggle, the certain, enduring and thus of
significance  for  any  further  development  of  knowledge  is  nonetheless
the higher; to adhere to  it is manly and demonstrates courage,  simplicity
and abstemiousness.  Gradually  not only  the  individual but all  mankind
will  be  raised  to  this  manliness,  when  they  have  finally  become  accustomed  to  valuing  viable,  enduring  knowledge  more  highly  and  lost  all faith  in  inspiration  and  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  by  miraculous
means.  - Worshippers of form, with their  standards  of the beautiful and
sublime, will, to be sure, at first have good ground for mockery once estimation  of  unpretentious  truths  and  the  scientific  spirit  begins  to  dominate:  but  only because either their eye  has not yet discovered the charm of the simplest form or because those raised in that spirit are as yet very far
from being  thoroughly  permeated  by  it,  so  that  they  still  thoughtlessly
imitate old forms (and do so badly, as does everyone to whom a thing no
longer matters very much).  Formerly the spirit was not engaged in rigorous  thinking,  its  serious  occupation  was  the  spinning  out  of forms  and symbols.  That  has  now changed;  serious  occupation  with  the  symbolic
1 3
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
has become a mark of a lower culture. As our arts themselves grow  ever
more intellectual,  our senses more spiritual,  and as for example we now
adjudge what is pleasant sounding quite differently from the way we did
a hundred years ago: so the  forms of our life will grow ever more spiritual,
perhaps to the eye of earlier ages uglier, but only because it is incapable of
seeing  how  the  realm  of  inner,  spiritual  beauty  is  continually  growing
deeper and  wider,  and  to  what extent we may all now  accord the eye of
insight greater  value  than  the fairest structure  or  the sublimest  edifice.
Astrology and what is related to  it. - It is probable that the objects of the re-
ligious,  moral  and  aesthetic  sensations  belong  only  to  the  surface  of
things, while man likes to believe  that here at least he is in touch with the
world's heart;  the reason he deludes himself is that these things produce
in him such profound  happiness and unhappiness,  and thus he  exhibits
here  the  same  pride as in the case of astrology. For astrology believes the
starry firmament revolves  around  the fate of man; the moral man,  however,  supposes  that what he has essentially at heart must also constitute the essence and heart of things.
Misunderstanding of the dream. - The  man  of  the  ages  of  barbarous  pri-
mordial  culture  believed  that  in  the  dream  he  was  getting  to  know  a
second real world: here is the origin of all metaphysics.  Without the dream
one would have had no occasion to divide the world into two. The dissection  into  soul  and  body  is  also  connected  with  the  oldest  idea  of  the dream,  likewise  the postulation of a life of the  soul,* thus the origin of all
belief in spirits, and probably also of the belief in gods.  'The dead live on,
for they appear to the living in dreams': that was the conclusion one formerly drew,  throughout  many millennia.
The  spirit of science  rules  its  parts,  not  the  whole. - The  separate  smallest
regions  of  science  are  treated  purely  objectively:  the  great  universal
sciences, on the other hand,  viewed as a whole pose the question- a very
unobjective  question,  to  be  sure  - to  what  end?  of  what  utility?  On
account of this regard for utility they are as a whole treated less impersonally  than  they  are in  their  parts.  And when  it comes to philosophy,  the summit of the entire scientific pyramid, we find the question as to the utility of knowledge as such involuntarily raised,  and the unconscious intention of every philosophy is to ascribe to it the highest utility. That is why there is in all  philosophies  so much high-flying metaphysics and such a
dread of the explanations offered by physics,  which seem so modest and
insignificant;  for  the  significance  of knowledge  for  life has to  appear  as
great as it possibly  can.  Here lies the antagonism between the individual
regions  of  science  and  philosophy.  The  latter  wants,  as  art  does,  to
bestow  on  life  and  action  the  greatest  possible  profundity  and  signifi-
•  life of the soul: Seelenscheinleib, Nietzsche's coinage
OF  FIRST  A N D   LAST  T H I N G S
cance; in the former one seeks knowledge and nothing further - and does
in fact acquire it. There has hitherto been no philosopher in whose hands
philosophy  has  not become an  apologia  for knowledge;  on  this  point at
least each of them is an optimist, inasmuch as he believes that knowledge
must  be  in  the  highest  degree  useful.  They  are  all  tyrannized  over  by
logic:  and logic is by its  nature optimism.
The mischief-maker  in  science.  - Philosophy  separated  itself  from  science
when it posed the question:  what kind of knowledge of the world and life
is it through which man  can live happiest? This took place in  the Socratic
schools: by  having in  view  the  objective of happiness  one applied a ligature  to  the  arteries of scientific research - and does  so  still today.
Pneumatological  elucidation of nature.  - Metaphysics  elucidates  the  handwriting of nature as it were pneumatologically, • as the church and its scholars  formerly  did  the  Bible.  It  requires  a  great  deal  of  understanding  to apply to  nature  the same  kind of rigorous art of elucidation that philologists  have  now  fashioned  for  all  books:  with  the  intention  of  comprehending  what  the  text  intends  to  say  but  without  sensing,  indeed presupposing,  a  second  meaning.  But as  even  with  regard  to  books  the
bad  art  of elucidation has by  no  means been  entirely overcome and one
still continually encounters in  the best educated circles remnants of allegorical  and  mystical  interpretations:  so  it  is  also  in  respect  to  nature  -
where,  indeed,  it is even far worse.
Metaphysical world. - It is  true,  there  could  be  a metaphysical world;  the
absolute  possibility  of  it  is  hardly  to  be  disputed.  We  behold  all  things
through the human head and cannot cut off this head; while the question
nonetheless remains what of the world would still be there if one had cut
it off.  This is a purely scientific problem and one not very well calculated
to  bother people  overmuch;  but all that has  hitherto made  metaphysical
assumptions  valuable,  terrible,  delightful  to  them,  all  that  has  begotten
these  assumptions,  is  passion,  error and  self-deception;  the  worst  of all
methods of acquiring knowledge, not the best of all, have taught belief in
them.  When  one  has  disclosed  these  methods  as  the  foundation  of  all
extant religions and metaphysical systems,  one  has refuted  them!  Then
that possibility still remains over; but one can do absolutely nothing with
it,  not  to  speak  of  letting  happiness,  salvation  and  life  depend  on  the
gossamer of such a possibility. - For one could assert nothing at all of the
metaphysical world except  that it was a  being-other,  an inaccessible,  incomprehensible being-other;  it would be  a  thing with negative qualities.
- Even if the existence of such a world were never so well demonstrated,
it  is  certain  that  knowledge  of  it  would  be  the  most  useless  of  all
•  pneumatologically: pneumatology is the  'science'  of spirits and spiritual beings
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
knowledge:  more  useless  even  than  knowledge of the  chemical  composition  of water  must be  to  the sailor in danger of shipwreck.
Future innocuousness of metaphysics. - As soon as the origin of religion,  art
and  morality  is  so  described  that  it  can be  perfectly  understood without
the postulation of metaphysical interference at the commencement or in  the
course  of  their  progress,  the  greater  part  of  our  interest  in  the  purely
theoretical problem of the 'thing in itself'  and 'appearance'  ceases to exist.
For with  religion,  art and morality we  do  not  touch  upon  the  'nature of
the world  in itself'; we are in the  realm of ideas,  no  'intuition' can take us
any further.  The question of how our conception of the world could differ
so widely from  the  disclosed  nature  of the  world  will  with  perfect  equanimity be  relinquished  to  the  physiology  and  history of the  evolution  of organisms and  concepts.
Language as putative science.  - The  significance  of language  for  the  evolution  of culture  lies  in  this,  that  mankind  set  up  in  language  a  separate world beside the other world, a place it took to be so firmly set that, standing upon it, it could lift the rest of the world off its hinges and make itself master of it.  To  the extent  that man has for long ages believed in  the concepts  and  names  of things as in aeternae veritates he  has appropriated  to himself that pride by  which he raised himself above the animal:  he really
thought  that  in  language  he  possessed  knowledge  of  the  world.  The
sculptor  of  language  was  not  so  modest  as  to  believe  that  he  was  only
giving  things  designations,  he  conceived  rather  that with  words  he was
expressing  supreme  knowledge  of  things;  language  is,  in  fact,  the  first
stage of the occupation with science.  Here,  too,  it is the belief that the truth
has been found out of which the  mightiest  sources of energy have flowed.
A  great  deal  later - only  now  - it  dawns  on  men  that  in  their belief  in
language  they  have  propagated  a  tremendous  error.* Happily,  it  is too
late for the evolution of reason, which depends on this belief, to be again
put back.  Logic
-
too depends  on  presuppositions with which nothing in
the real world corresponds,  for example on the presupposition that there
are  identical things,  that the  same  thing is identical at  different  points  of
time:  but  this  science  came  into  existence  through  the  opposite  belief
(that such conditions do obtain in the real world). It is the same with mathematics,  which  would certainly not have  come  into  existence  if  one  had known  from  the  beginning  that  there  was  in  nature no  exactly  straight
line,  no real circle,  no  absolute  magnitude.
1 2
Dream and culture. - The function of the brain that sleep encroaches upon
most  is  the  memory:  not  that  it ceases  altogether - but it  is  reduced  to  a
condition  of imperfection such  as in  the primeval ages  of mankind may
have been normal by day and in waking. Confused and capricious as it is,
•  Nietzsche had described this error in detail in Truth and Falsehood in the Extra·Mora/ Sense
(1873)·
OF  F I RST  A N D   LAST T H I N G S
it continually  confuses  one  thing  with  another on the  basis of the  most
fleeting similarities:  but  it  was  with  the  same confusion and  capriciousness that the peoples composed their mythologies, and even today travellers observe how  much  the  savage  is  inclined  to  forgetfulness,  how  his mind begins to reel and stumble after a brief exertion of the memory and
he utters lies and nonsense out of mere enervation.  But in dreams we all
resemble this savage; failure  to  recognize correctly  and erroneously supposing one thing to be the same as another is the ground of the false conclusions of which we are guilty in dreams; so that,  when we clearly recall a  dream,  we  are  appalled  to  discover  so  much  folly  in  ourselves.  - The
perfect  clarity  of  all  the  images  we  see  in  dreams  which  is  the  precondition of our unquestioning belief in their reality again  reminds  us of conditions  pertaining  to  earlier  mankind,  in  whom  hallucination  was
extraordinarily common and sometimes seized hold on whole communities,  whole  peoples  at  the  same  time.  Thus:  in  sleep  and  dreams  we repeat once again the  curriculum of earlier mankind.*
Logic of the dream. - In sleep our nervous system is continually agitated by
a multiplicity  of inner events,  almost  all our organs are active,  our blood
circulates  vigorously,  the  position  of  the  sleeper  presses  on  individual
limbs,  his  bedcovers  influence  his  sensibilities  in  various  ways,  his
stomach digests and  its  motions  disturb  other organs,  his intestines are
active,  the position of his  head  involves  unusual  muscular  contortions,
his  feet,  unshod  and  not  pressing  against  the  floor,  produce  an  unfamiliar feeling, as does the difference in the way his whole body is clad - all this,  through its unusualness and to  a differing degree each day,  excites
the  entire  system  up  to  the  functioning  of  the  brain;  and  so  there  are  a
hundred occasions for the mind to be involved in puzzlement and to look
for grounds for this  excitation:  the  dream  is  the  seeking and positing of the
causes of this  excitement  of  the  sensibilities,  that  is  to  say  the  supposed
causes.  If,  for example,  you  tie  two  straps about your feet  you  may  well
dream that your feet are coiled round by  snakes:  this is first a hypothesis,
then a belief,  with an accompanying pictorial representation and the supposition:  'these  snakes  must be  the  causa of  those  sensations  that  I,  the sleeper, feel' - thus the sleeper's mind judges.  The immediate past he has
thus  inferred becomes  through  his  aroused  imagination  the  present  to
him.  Everyone  knows  from  experience how  quickly  a dreamer entwines
with his  dream a  sound that strongly impinges upon him from without,
the ringing of bells or the firing of cannon,  for example; that is  to  say,  he
accounts  for  the  sound  in  terms  of  the  dream,  so  that  he  believes  he
experiences the cause of the sound first,  then the sound itself. - But how
does  it  come  about  that  the  dreamer's  mind  always  blunders  like  this,
•  In The Interpretation of Dreams, ch.  VII (B),  Freud writes: 'We can guess how much to the
point  is Nietzsche's  assertion  that  in  dreams  "some  primeval  relic  of humanity  is at  work
which we can  now  scarcely reach  any  longer by  a direct  path";  and  we may expect that the
analysis of dreams will lead us to a knowledge of man's archaic heritage, of what is psychologically innate in him.'
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
when the same mind is accustomed to be so sober, cautious and so sceptical with regard  to  hypotheses while  it is awake? - so that the  first  plausible  hypothesis  for  explaining  a  sensation  that  occurs  to  him  is  at  once accepted as the truth?  (For in dreams we believe in the dream as though it
were  reality,  that  is  to  say  we  regard  our  hypothesis  as  completely
proved.) - In my  opinion,  the  conclusions  man  still  draws  in  dreams  to
the  present  day  for  many  millennia  mankind  also  drew  when  awake:  the
first  causa  that  entered  the  mind  as  an  explanation  of  anything  that
required  explaining  satisfied  it  and  was  accounted  truth.  (According  to
travellers' tales savages still do  this  today.) In the  dream  this  piece  of primeval humanity continues to exercise itself,  for it is the basis upon  which higher rationality evolved and  continues to evolve  in every  human being:
the dream takes us back again to remote stages of human culture and provides  us  with  a  means  of  understanding  them  better.  We  now  find dream-thinking*  so  easy  because  it  is  in  precisely  this  imaginative  and
agreeable  form  of  explanation  by  means  of  the  first  plausible  idea  that
strikes us  that we  have  been  so well drilled over  such enormous periods
of human evolution. To this extent the dream is a relaxation for the brain,
which  has had  enough  of the  strenuous demands in the way of thinking
such  as  are  imposed  by  our  higher  culture  during  the  day.  - A  related
occurrence  which  stands  as  portal  and  entrance-hall  of  the  dream  can
actually be  observed  in  full  wakefulness.  If we  close  our eyes,  the  brain
produces  a  host  of light-impressions  and  colours,  probably  as  a  kind  of
after-play and  echo of those effects of light which crowd in upon it during
the  day.  Now,  however,  the  reason  (in  alliance  with  the  imagination)  at
once  assembles  these  in  themselves  formless  colour-impressions  into
definite  figures,  shapes,  landscapes,  moving  groups.  What  is  actually
occurring is again a kind of inferring of the cause from the effect; the mind
asks  where these light-impressions and colours come from and supposes
these  shapes  and figures are their causes:  it regards them  as occasioning
these lights  and  colours  because,  by  day and with  eyes open,  it is accustomed  to  finding  that  every  colour,  every  light-impression  does  in  fact have a  cause  that occasions  it.  Here,  then,  the  imagination  is continually
providing the mind with  images borrowed from the  sight-impressions of
the  day,  and  this  is  precisely  the  way  in  which  it  fashions  the  dreamfantasy: - that is to say, the supposed cause is inferred from the effect and introduced after the effect: and all with extraordinary  rapidity,  so that,  as
with  a  conjurer,  a  confusion of judgement can here  arise  and  successive
events  appear  as  simultaneous  events  or  eve_n  with  the  order  of  their
occurrence reversed. - These  facts  show us how late more rigorous logical
thinking,  a  clear  perception of the  nature  of cause  and  effect,  must  have
been evolved  if our faculties of reason and  understanding even now involuntarily  grasp  at those  primitive  forms  of conclusion  and  inference  and we  still  live  about  half  of  our  life  in  this  condition.  - The  poet  and  the
artist,  too,  foists upon his  moods and  states of mind  causes which are cer-
•  dream-thinking:  Traumdenken
OF  FI R S T   A N D   LAST T H I N G S
tainly not the true ones; to this extent he recalls an earlier humanity and
can aid us to an understanding of it.
Sympathetic resonance. - All stronger moods bring with them a sympathetic
resonance on  the part of related  sensations and  moods:  they as  it were
root  up  the  memory.  Something  in  us  is  provoked  to  recollection  and
becomes aware of similar states and their origins.  Thus there come to be
constructed  habitual  rapid  connections  between  feelings  and  thoughts
which,  if they succeed one another with lightning speed,  are in the end
no longer experienced as complexes but as unities.  It is in this sense that
one speaks of the moral feelings, of the religious feelings, as though these
were  simple  unities:  in  truth,  however,  they are  rivers  with  a  hundred
tributaries and sources.  Here too, as so often, the unity of the word is no
guarantee of the unity of the thing.
No inner and outer in the world. - As Democritus• transferred the concepts
Above and Below to infinite space, where they make no sense, so philosophers in  general transfer the concept  'inner  and  outer'  to  the  essence and  phenomena  of  the  world;  they  believe  that  profound  feelings  take
one deep into the  interior,  close to the heart of nature.  But such feelings
are profound only insofar as when they occur certain complex groups of
thoughts which  we  call  profound  are,  scarcely  perceptibly,  regularly
aroused with them; a feeling is profound because we regard the thoughts
that accompany it as profound.  But a profound thought can nonetheless
be  very  distant  from  the  truth,  as,  for  example,  every  metaphysical
thought  is;  if  one  deducts  from  the  profound  feeling  the  element  of
thought mixed in with it, what remains is the strong feeling, and this has
nothing to do with knowledge as such, just as strong belief demonstrates
only its strength, not the truth of that which is believed.
Appearance and  thing  in  itself.  - Philosophers  are  accustomed  to  station
themselves before life  and experience - before  that which  they  call  the
world of appearance - as before a painting that has been unrolled once
and for all and unchangeably depicts the same scene: this scene, they believe, has to be correctly interpreted,  so as to draw a conclusion as to the nature of the  being  that produced the  picture:  that is  to  say,  as  to  the
nature of the thing in itself,  which it is customary to regard as  the sufficient reasont for the existence of the world of appearance.  As against this, more rigorous logicians, having clearly identified the concept of the
metaphysical  as  that  of  the  unconditioned,  consequently  also  unconditioning, have disputed any connection between the unconditioned (the metaphysical world) and  the  world  we  know:  so  that  what appears in
•  Democritus (c. 46o to c. 370 BC): Greek philosopher, one of the latest of the so-called 'pre
Socratic' philosophers
t  The  principle  of  sufficient  reason's  various  formulations  include  'every  existent  has  a
ground' and 'every event has a cause'; Schopenhauer discussed the history and justification of
the prindple in The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason  (1813).
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
appearance is precisely not the thing in itself,  and no conclusion can be
drawn from the former as to the nature of the latter.  Both parties,  however, overlook the possibility that this painting - that which we humans call  life  and  experience  - has  gradually  become,  is  indeed  still  fully  in
course of becoming, and should  thus not be regarded as a fixed object on
the basis of which a conclusion as to the  nature  of its originator (the  sufficient reason) may either be drawn or pronounced undrawable.  Because we have for millennia  made  moral,  aesthetic,  religious demands on the
world, looked  upon it with  blind desire, passion or fear, and abandoned
ourselves to the bad habits of illogical thinking, this world has gradually
become so  marvellously variegated,  frightful,  meaningful,  soulful,  it has
acquired colour - but we have been the colourists: it is the human intellect
that  has  made  appearance  appear  and  transported  its  erroneous basic
conceptions into things.  Late,  very late - it has reflected on all this: and
now the world of experience and the thing in itself seem to it so extraordi·
narily different from one another and divided apart that it rejects the idea
that  the  nature  of one can be inferred  from the nature of the other - or
invites  us in a chillingly mysterious fashion to abandon our intellect,  our
personal will:  so as to attain to the real by becoming real oneself.  Others
again  have  assembled  all  the  characteristic  traits  of  our  world  of
appearance - that is to say,  the idea of the world spun out of intellectual
errors we have inherited - and,  instead of indicting the intellect as the guilty
party, have charged the essence of things with being the cause of the very
uncanny  character  this  world  in  fact  possesses  and  have  preached
redemption from being.  - With  all  these  conceptions  the steady and laborious process  of science,  which will one day celebrate its greatest triumph in a history of the genesis of thought,  will in the end decisively have done;  for  the  outcome  of this  history may well be  the  conclusion:  That
which we now call the world is the outcome of a host of errors and fantasies  which  have  gradually  arisen  and  grown  entwined  with  one another in the course of the overall  evolution  of the  organic being,  and
are now inherited by us as the accumulated treasure of the entire past - as
treasure:  for  the  value  of  our  humanity  depends  upon  it.  Rigorous
science  is  capable  of  detaching  us  from  this  ideational  world  only  to  a
limited extent - and more is certainly not to be desired - inasmuch as it is
incapable of making any essential inroad into the power of habits of feeling  acquired  in primeval  times:  but  it can,  quite  gradually  and  step by step,  illuminate the history of the genesis of this  world as idea - and,  for
brief periods at any rate, lift us up out of the entire proceeding.  Perhaps
we  shall  then  recognize  that  the  thing  in  itself  is  worthy  of  Homeric
laughter:  that  it  appeared  to  be  so  much,  indeed  everything,  and  is
actually empty,  that is to say empty of significance.
Metaphysical explanations. - The young person values metaphysical explanations because  they  reveal to him  something in the highest degree significant  in  things  he  found  unpleasant  or  contemptible;  and  if  he  is 20
O F  F I R ST  A N D  L A ST  T H I N G S
discontented with himself this feeling is alleviated when he comes to recognize the innermost enigma or misery of the universe in that which he so much condemns in himself. To feel more irresponsible and at the same
time to find things more interesting - that is the twofold benefit for which
he believes he has metaphysics to thank. Later on, to be sure, he acquires
mistrust of the whole  metaphysical mode  of explanation;  then  perhaps
he sees that the effects he has experienced are to be attained equally well
and more  scientifically by another route:  that physical and historical explanations  produce  that  feeling  of  irresponsibility  at least  as  well,  and that interest in  life  and  its problems is perhaps enflamed even more by
them.
Fundamental questions  of  metaphysics.  When  one  day  the  history  of the
-
genesis of thought comes to be written,  the following sentence by a distinguished logician will also stand revealed in a new  light:  'The primary universal  law  of the  knowing  subject  consists  in  the  inner  necessity  of
recognizing every object in itself as being in its own essence  something
identical with itself, thus self-existent and at bottom always the same and
unchanging,  in short as a substance'.  This law,  too, which is here called
'primary',  evolved: one day it will be  shown how gradually, in the lower
organisms, this tendency comes into being: how the purblind mole's eyes
of this organization at first  never see anything but the same thing;  how
then,  when  the  various  pleasurable  and  unpleasurable  stimuli  become
more  noticeable,  various  different  substances  are  gradually  distinguished, but each of them with one attribute, that is to say a single relationship  with  such  an  organism.  - The  first  stage  of the  logical  is  the judgement: and the essence of the judgement consists,  according to  the
best logicians, in belief.  At the bottom of all belief there lies the sensation of
the  pleasurable or painful  in  respect  to  the  subject  experiencing  the  sensation.  A new,  third sensation as a product of two preceding single sensations is the judgement in its lowest form. -- In our primary condition, all that interests  us organic beings in  any  thing  is its  relationship  to  us in
respect of pleasure and pain. Between the moments in which we become
conscious  of  this  relationship,  the  states  of awareness  of  sensation,  lie
those  of  repose,  of  non-sensation:  then  the  world  and  every  thing  is
devoid of interest to us, we notice no alteration in it (just as now anyone
absorbed with interest in something will still not notice someone walking
by  him).  To  the  plants  all  things  are  usually  in  repose,  eternal,  every
thing  identical  with  itself.  It  is  from  the  period  of the  lower  organisms
that  man  has  inherited  the  belief  that  there  are  identical  things  (only
knowledge educated  in  the  highest scientificality contradicts this  proposition). It may even be that the original belief of everything organic was from the very beginning that all the rest of the world is one and unmoving.  - What  lies  farthest from  this  primeval  stage  of  the  logical  is  the notion of causality: even now,  indeed,  we believe at bottom that all sensations and  actions  are  acts of free will;  when  the  sentient  individuum 21
H U M A N ,  A L L  T O O   H U M A N
observes  itself,  it regards  every  sensation,  every  change,  as something
isolated,  that is to say unconditioned,  disconnected:  it emerges out of us
independently of anything earlier or later.  We are hungry, but originally
we  do  not  think  that  the  organism  wants  to  sustain  itself;  this  feeling
seems  to be  asserting  itself  without cause or purpose,  it  isolates  itself and
considers itself willful. Thus: belief in  freedom of will  is  a  primary  error
committed  by  everything  organic,  as  old  as  the  impulse  to  the  logical
itself;  belief  in  unconditioned  substances  and  in identical  things  is  likewise a primary,  ancient error committed by  everything organic.  Insofar, however, as all metaphysics has had principally to do with substance and
freedom of will,  one may designate it the science that treats of the fundamental errors of mankind - but does so as though they were fundamental truths.
Number. - The invention of the laws of numbers was made on the basis of
the error,  dominant even from the earliest times,  that there are identical
things  (but  in  fact  nothing is  identical  with  anything  else);  at  least  that
there  are  things  (but  there  is  no  'thing').  The  assumption  of  plurality
always  presupposes  the  existence  of  something  that  occurs  more  than
once:  but  precisely  here  error  already  holds  sway,  here  already  we  are
fabricating beings,  unities which do  not exist. - Our sensations of space
and  time  are  false,  for tested consistently  they lead  to  logical  contradictions.  The  establishment  of conclusions  in  science  always  unavoidably involves  us  in  calculating  with  certain  false  magnitudes:  but  because
these  magnitudes are at least constant, as for example are our sensations
of time and space, the conclusions of science acquire a complete rigorousness and certainty in their coherence  with one another; one can build on them - up to  that  final  stage  at which our erroneous basic assumptions,
those constant errors, come to be incompatible with our conclusions, for
example in the theory of atoms.  Here we continue to feel ourselves compelled to assume the existence of a 'thing' or material 'substratum' which is moved,  while the whole  procedure of science has pursued the task of
resolving everything  thing-like  (material)  in  motions:  here  too  our  sensations  divide  that  which  moves  from  that  which  is  moved,  and  we cannot get out of this circle because our belief in the existence of things
has been tied up with our being from time immemorial. - When Kant says
'the understanding does not draw its laws from nature, it prescribes them
to nature', this is wholly true with regard to the concept of nature which we
are obliged to attach  to  nature  (nature
world as idea,  that is as error),
=
but which is the summation of a host of errors of the understanding. - To
a  world  which  is not our idea  the  laws of numbers are  wholly inapplicable:  these are valid  only in the  human world.
A few  steps  back.  - One,  certainly  very  high  level  of  culture  has  been
attained  when  a man emerges  from  superstitious  and religious concepts
and fears and no longer believes in angels,  for example, or in original sin,
OF  F I R S T  A N D  L A S T  T H I N G S
and has ceased to speak of the salvation of souls: if he is at this level of liberation  he  now  has,  with  the  greatest  exertion  of  mind,  to  overcome metaphysics.  Then, however,  he needs to take a retrograde step: he has to
grasp the  historical justification  that resides  in  such  ideas,  likewise  the
psychological;  he has to recognize that they have been most responsible
for the advancement of mankind and that without such a retrograde step
he will deprive himself of the best that mankind has hitherto produced. -
In  regard  to  philosophical  metaphysics,  I  see  more  and  more  who  are
making for  the  negative  goal  (that  all  positive  metaphysics is  an  error),
but still few who are  taking a few steps back; for one  may  well want to
look out over the topmost rung of the ladder, but one ought not to want
to stand on it.  The  most enlightened get only as  far as  liberating themselves from metaphysics and looking back on it from above: whereas here too,  as  in the hippodrome,  at the end of the  track it is  necessary to turn
the corner.
Probable  victory of scepticism.  Let  us for  once  accept  the  validity of the
-
sceptical point of departure:  if there  were no  other,  metaphysical world
and  all  explanations  of the  only  world  known  to  us  drawn  from  metaphysics were useless to us, in what light would we then regard men and things? This question can be thought through, and it is valuable to do so,
even if we do for once ignore the question whether the existence of anything  metaphysical  has  been  scientifically  demonstrated  by  Kant  and Schopenhauer. For the historical probability is that one day mankind will
very possibly become in general and on the whole sceptical in this matter;
thus the question becomes: what shape will human society then assume
under the  influence  of  such  an  attitude of  mind?  Perhaps  the  scientific
demonstration  of  the  existence  of  any  kind  of  metaphysical  world  is
already so difficult that mankind will never again be free of a mistrust of it.
And if one has a mistrust of metaphysics the results are by and large the
same as if it had been directly refuted and one no longer had the right to
believe in it.  The historical question in regard to an unmetaphysical attitude of mind on the part of mankind remains the same in both cases.
Disbelief in the 'monumentum aere perennius'. * - An essential disadvantage
which the cessation of the metaphysical outlook brings with it lies in the
fact that the attention of the individual is too firmly fixed on his own brief
span of life and receives no stronger impulse to work at the construction
of enduring institutions intended to last for centuries; he wants to pluck
the  fruit  himself from  the  tree  he plants,  and  he  is therefore no longer
interested in planting those trees which demand constant tending for a
century and are intended to provide shade for long successions of generations.  For the metaphysical outlook bestows the belief that it offers the last,  ultimate  foundation  upon  which  the  whole  future  of mankind  is
then invited to establish and construct itself; the individual is promoting
'  'monumentum aere perennius': a memorial longer lasting than bronze (Horace)
H U M A N ,   A l l  T O O   H U M A N
his  salvation  when,  for  example,  he founds  a  church  or a  convent,  he
thinks it will be accounted to his credit and rewarded in the eternal future
life  of his  soul,  it is a contribution to  the  eternal  salvation  of the  soul.  -
Can  science,  too,  awaken  such  faith  in  its  conclusions?  The  fact  is  that
science  needs  doubt  and  distrust  for  its  closest  allies;  nonetheless,  the
sum  of unimpeachable  truths  - truths,  that is,  which  have  survived  all
the assaults of scepticism and disintegration - can in time become so great
(in the dietetics of health, for example) that on the basis of them one may
resolve to embark on 'everlasting' works.  In the meanwhile,  the contrast
between our agitated ephemeral existence and the slow-breathing repose
of metaphysical ages  is  still too  strong,  because the two ages are still too
close together; the individual human being himself now runs  through far
too many inner and outer evolutions for him  to venture to establish himself securely and once and for all even for so short a span as his own lifetime.  A  completely  modern  man  who  wants,  for  example,  to  build himself  a  house  has  at  the  same  time  the  feeling  he  is  proposing  to
immure himself alive in a mausoleum.
Age of comparison. - The less men are bound by tradition, the greater is the
fermentation of motivations within them, and the greater in consequence
their outward restlessness,  their mingling together with one another, the
polyphony of their endeavours. Who is there who now still feels a strong
compulsion to attach himself and his posterity to a particular place? Who
is there  who  still feels any  strong attachment at all? Just as in the arts all
the genres are imitated  side  by  side,  so  are  all the  stages  and  genres of
morality, custom, culture. - Such an age acquires its significance through
the fact that in it the  various  different  philosophies  of life,  customs,  cultures  can  be  compared  and  experienced  side  by  side;  which  in  earlier ages,  when, just as all artistic  genres  were attached to a particular place
and time,  so every culture still enjoyed only a localized domination, was
not possible.  Now an enhanced aesthetic sensibility will come to a definitive decision between all these forms offering themselves for comparison: most of them - namely all those rejected by this sensibility - it will allow
to die out. There is  likewise  now taking place a selecting out among the
forms  and  customs  of  higher  morality  whose  objective  can  only  be  the
elimination of the lower moralities. This is the age of comparison! It is the
source of its pride - but,  as is only reasonable, also of its suffering. Let us
not  be afraid of  this  suffering!  Let  us rather confront  the  task  which  the
age sets us as boldly as we  can:  and  then posterity will bless us for it - a
posterity  that  will  know  itself  to  be  as  much  beyond  the  self-enclosed
original  national  cultures  as it is beyond  the culture of comparison,  but
will look back upon both species of culture as upon venerable antiquities.
Possibility of progress. - When  a scholar of the old culture swears to have
nothing more to do with people who believe in progress he is right.  For
the old culture has its goods and greatness behind it and history compels
OF  FIRST  A N D   LAST T H I N G S
one to admit that it can never be fresh again; one needs to be intolerably
stupid or fanatical to deny this. But men are capable of consciously resolving to evolve themselves to a new culture, whereas formerly they did so unconsciously and fortuitously: they can now create better conditions for
the  propagation of men  and  for  their  nutrition,  education  and  instruction,  manage the earth as a whole economically, balance and employ the powers of men in general. This new, conscious culture destroys the old,
which viewed as a whole has led an unconscious animal- and plant-life; it
also destroys mistrust of progress - it is possible.  It would,  of course, be
rash  and  almost  nonsensical  to  believe  that  progress  must  necessarily
follow; but how could it be denied  that progress is possible? On the other
hand,  progress in the sense and along the paths of the old culture is not
even thinkable. If romantic fantasizings still do designate their goals (e.g.
self-contained original national cultures) as  'progress',  they nonetheless
borrow their image of it from the past: in this domain their thinking and
imagining lacks all originality.
Private and public morality. - Since the belief has ceased that a God broadly
directs  the  destinies  of the  world  and  that,  all  the  apparent  twists  and
turns in its path notwithstanding, is leading mankind gloriously upward,
man has to set himself ecumenical goals embracing the whole earth.  The
former  morality,  namely  Kant's,  demanded  of  the  individual  actions
which one desired of all men:  that was a very naive thing; as if everyone
knew without further ado what mode of action would benefit the whole
of mankind, that is, what actions at all are desirable; it is a theory like that
of free trade, presupposing that universal harmony must result of itself in
accordance with innate laws of progress.  Perhaps some future survey of
the requirements of mankind will show that it is absolutely not desirable
that all men should act in the same way, but rather that in the interest of
ecumenical goals whole tracts of mankind ought to have special, perhaps
under certain circumstances even evil tasks imposed upon them. - In any
event, if mankind is not to destroy itself through such conscious universal  rule,  it must first of all attain to a hitherto altogether unprecedented knowledge of the preconditions of culture as a scientific standard for ecumenical goals.  Herein lies  the tremendous task facing the great spirits of the coming century.
Reaction as progress.  Sometimes there appear blunt and forceful  spirits
-
capable of exciting great enthusiasm whose development is nonetheless
retarded, so that they conjure up again an earlier phase of mankind: they
serve to prove that the modern tendencies against which they act are not
yet strong enough, that there is something lacking in them: otherwise the
latter  would  be  able  to  offer better  resistance  to  these  conjurers.  Thus
Luther's Reformation,  for example,  witnesses  that in his century all the
impulses  to  freedom of spirit were  still uncertain,  tender and youthful;
science  was  as  yet  unable  to  raise  its  head.  The  whole  Renaissance,
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
indeed, seems like an early spring almost snowed away again. But in our
century,  too,  Schopenhauer's  metaphysics demonstrates that even now
the  scientific  spirit is not yet sufficiently strong: so that,  although all the
dogmas  of  Christianity  have  long  since  been  demolished,  the  whole
medieval  Christian  conception  of  the  world  and  of  the  nature  of man
could in Schopenhauer's teaching celebrate a resurrection. Much science
resounds in his teaching, but what dominates it is not science but the old
familiar 'metaphysical need'. One of the greatest, indeed quite invaluable
advantages we derive from  Schopenhauer is that through him our sensibilities are for a time compelled  to return to older ways of contemplating the world and  mankind that once held  sway which we would otherwise
have no easy access to.  The gain for historical justice is very great:  I believe  that  no one would  find it easy to  do justice  to  Christianity and its Asiatic  relations  without  Schopenhauer' s  assistance:  on  the  basis  of
present-day Christianity alone it would  be  quite impossible.  Only after
this great  triumph of justice, only after we have corrected the mode of historical  interpretation introduced by  the Age  of Enlightenment on  so essential a point as this, may we bear the banner of the Enlightenment - the banner bearing  the  three  names  Petrach, *  Erasmus, t  Voltaire - further
onward.  Out of reaction we have created progress.
Substitute for  religion.  One  believes  one  is  commending  a  philosophy
-
when one presents it as a popular substitute for religion. The economy of
the  spirit  does  indeed  occasionally  require  transitional  orders  of ideas;
thus the passage from religion to a scientific mode of thought is a violent
and  perilous  leap,  something  to  be advised  against.  To that extent  this
recommendation of a philosophy is justified. But in the end one also has
to understand that the needs which religion has satisfied and philosophy
is now  supposed  to satisfy are not immutable;  they can be weakened and
exterminated.  Consider,  for example,  that Christian distress of mind that
comes  from  sighing  over  one's  inner  depravity  and  care  for  one's  salvation  - all conceptions  originating in nothing but errors  of reason and deserving,  not  satisfaction,  but  obliteration.  A  philosophy  can  be
employed  either  to  satisfy  such  needs  or  to  set  them aside;  for  they  are
acquired,  time-bound  needs  resting  on  presuppositions  that  contradict
those of science.  To effect a transition here, to relieve the heart overladen
with  feeling,  it is much more useful to employ art; for those conceptions
we have spoken of will be nourished far less by art than they will be by a
metaphysical philosophy.  From art it will then be  easier to go over to a
truly liberating philosophical science.
Words  in  bad  odour.  - Away  with  those  overused  words  optimism  and
pessimism!  We  have  had  enough  of them.  Occasion  for  using  them  is
growing less day by day;  it is only idle  chatterers  who still have such an
•  Petrach: Francesco Petrach (1304-74): Italian poet and scholar
t  Erasmus: Desiderius Erasmus (1466-1536): Dutch humanist
OF  FI RST  A N D  LAST T H I N G S
indispensable need of them. For why in the world should anyone want to
be  an  optimist  if  he  does  not  have  to  defend  a  God  who  has  to  have
created  the best of worlds  if he himself is goodness and perfection - but
what thinker still has need of the hypothesis of a God? - But any occasion
for a  pessimistic creed  is likewise  lacking,  unless one has an interest  in
provoking the advocates of God,  the theologians or the theologizing philosophers,  and  forcefully  asserting  the  opposite  point  of view:  that evil reigns, that there exists more pain than pleasure, that the world is an artifice, the apparition of an evil will to live. But who still bothers about theologians  - except  other  theologians?  - Disregarding  theology  and opposition to theology, it is quite obvious that the world is neither good
nor evil, let alone the best of all or the worst of all worlds, and that these
concepts 'good'  and  'evil'  possess meaning only when applied to men,
and perhaps even here are, as they are usually employed,  unjustified: in
any  event,  we  must  cast  off both  that  conception  of  the  world  that
inveighs against it and that which glorifies it.
Drunk with the odour of blossoms. - The ship of mankind has, one believes, a
deeper and deeper draught the more heavily it is laden; one believes that
the more profoundly a man thinks,  the more tenderly he feels, the more
highly he rates himself,  the greater the distance grows between him and
the other animals - the more he appears as the genius among animals the closer he will get to the true nature of the world and to a knowledge of it: this he does in fact do through science, but he thinks he does so even
more through his arts and religions. These are,  to be sure,  a blossom of
the world, but they are certainly not closer to the roots of the world than the
stern is:  they provide  us with  no better  understanding  of the  nature  of
things at all,  although  almost  everyone believes they  do.  It is error that
has made  mankind  so  profound,  tender,  inventive as to produce such a
flower as  the  arts  and  religions.  Pure  knowledge  would  have  been  incapable of it.  Anyone who unveiled  to us the nature of the world would produce for all of us the most unpleasant disappointment.  It is not the
world as thing in itself, it is the world as idea (as error) that is so full of significance,  profound,  marvellous, and bearing in its womb all happiness and  unhappiness.  This  consequence  leads  to  a  philosophy  of  logical
world-denial:  which  can,  however,  be  united  with  a  practical  worldaffirmation just as easily as with its opposite.
Bad habits in drawing conclusions. - The commonest erroneous conclusions
drawn by  mankind  are  these:  a  thing exists,  therefore it has a  right  to.
Here the conclusion is from the capacity to live to the fitness to live, from
the  fitness  to  live  to  the  right  to  live.  Then:  an  opinion  makes  happy,
therefore it is a true opinion,  its effect is good,  therefore it itself is good
and  true.  Here the effect is accorded the predicate beneficent, good,  in
the sense of useful, and then the cause is furnished with the same predicate good, but here in the sense of the logically valid. The reverse of these
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
propositions  is:  a  thing  cannot  prevail,  preserve  itself,  therefore  it is
wrong; an opinion causes pain and agitation, therefore it is false. The free
spirit, who is all too often acquainted with the erroneousness of this kind
of reasoning and has to suffer from its consequences,  often succumbs to
the temptation to draw  the opposite conclusions,  which are of course in
general equally erroneous: a thing cannot prevail, therefore it is good; an
opinion causes pain and distress, therefore it is true.
The illogical  necessary.  Among  the  things  that  can  reduce  a  thinker  to
-
despair is the knowledge that the illogical is a necessity for mankind, and
that  much  good  proceeds from  the illogical.  It is implanted so firmly  in
the passions, in language, in art, in religion, and in general in everything
that  lends  value  to  life,  that  one  cannot  pull  it out  of these  fair  things
without mortally injuring them.  Only very naive people are capable of believing that the nature of man could be transformed into a purely logical one;  but  if there  should  be  degrees  of approximation  to  this  objective,
what  would  not have to be lost if this course were  taken!  Even the most
rational man from time to time needs to recover nature,  that is to say his
illogical original relationship with all things.
Injustice necessary.  - All judgements as  to  the  value of life  have  evolved
illogically  and  are  therefore  unjust.  The  falsity  of  human  judgement
derives  firstly  from  the  condition  of the  material to be judged,  namely
very incomplete, secondly from the way in which the sum is arrived at on
the basis of this material,  and thirdly from the fact that every individual
piece of this material is in tum the outcome of false knowledge, and is so
with absolute necessity.  Our experience of another person,  for example,
no matter how close he  stands  to us,  can never be complete,  so that we
would have a logical right to a total evaluation of him; all evaluations are
premature  and  are  bound  to  be.  Finally,  the  standard  by  which  we
measure, our own being, is not an unalterable magnitude, we are subject
to moods and fluctuations, and yet we would have to know ourselves as a
fixed standard to be able justly to assess the relation between ourself and
anything  else  whatever.  Perhaps  it would  follow  from all  this  that one
ought  not  to judge at all;  if only it were  possible  to  live without evaluating,  without  having aversions and  partialities! - for all aversion is dependent on an evaluation,  likewise all partiality. A drive to something or away from something divorced  from a  feeling one  is  desiring  the beneficial or avoiding  the  harmful,  a  drive  without  some  kind  of knowing evaluation  of the  worth  of its  objective,  does  not exist in  man.  We  are
from the very beginning illogical and thus unjust beings and can recognize
this: this is one of the greatest and most irresolvable discords of existence.
Error regarding life necessary to life. - Every belief in the value and dignity of
life rests on false thinking; it is possible only through the fact that empa-
OF  FI R S T   A N D  LAST T H I N G S
thy with the universal life and suffering of mankind is very feebly developed  in  the  individual.  Even  those  rarer  men  who  think  beyond themselves at all have an eye, not for this universal life, but for fenced-off
portions  of  it.  If one  knows  how  to  keep  the  exceptions  principally  in
view,  I mean the greatly gifted and pure of soul, takes their production
for the goal of world-evolution and rejoices in the effects they in turn produce, one may believe in the value of life, because then one is overlooking all other men: thinking falsely,  that is to say.  And likewise if,  though one
does keep in view all mankind, one accords validity only to one species of
drives, the less egoistical, and justifies them in face of all the others, then
again  one  can  hope  for  something  of  mankind  as  a  whole  and  to  this
extent believe in the value of life: thus,  in this case too, through falsity of
thinking.  Whichever of these  attitudes one  adopts,  however,  one  is by
adopting  it  an  exception  among  men.  The  great  majority  endure  life
without complaining overmuch; they believe in the value of existence, but
they do so precisely because each of them exists for himself alone,  refusing  to  step  out  of  himself  as  those  exceptions  do:  everything  outside themselves they notice not at all or at most as a dim shadow. Thus for the
ordinary,  everyday man the value of life rests solely on the fact that he
regards himself more highly than he does the world. The great lack of imagination from which he suffers means he is unable to feel his way into other beings and thus he participates as little as possible in their fortunes
and  sufferings.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  who  really  could  participate  in
them would have to despair of the value of life; if he succeeded in encompassing and feeling within himself the total consciousness of mankind he would collapse with a curse on existence - for mankind has as a whole no
goal,  and  the individual man  when  he  regards  its  total  course  cannot
derive from it any support or comfort, but must be reduced to despair. If
in all he  does  he has  before  him  the ultimate goallessness  of man,  his
actions acquire in his own eyes the character of useless squandering. But
to feel thus squandered, not merely as an individual but as humanity as a
whole, in the way we behold the individual fruits of nature squandered,
is a feeling beyond all other feelings. - But who is capable of such a feeling? Certainly only a poet: and poets always know how to console themselves.
In  mitigation. - But will  our philosophy not  thus  become a tragedy? Will
truth not become inimical to life,  to the better man? A question seems to
lie heavily on our tongue and yet refuses to be uttered: whether one could
consciously reside  in untruth? or,  if one were obliged  to,  whether  death
would not be preferable? For there is no longer any 'ought'; for morality,
insofar as  it was  an  'ought',  has  been  just  as much annihilated  by  our
mode of thinking as has religion.  Knowledge can allow as motives only
pleasure and pain, utility and injury: but how will these motives come to
terms  with  the  sense  for  truth?  For  they  too  are  in  contact with errors
(insofar as  inclination  and  aversion  and  their  very  unjust  assessments
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
are,  as we said,  the  essential  determinants  of pleasure  and  pain).  The
whole  of  human  life  is  sunk  deeply  in  untruth;  the  individual  cannot
draw  it  up  out  of this  well  without  thereby  growing  profoundly  disillusioned  about  his own  past,  without finding  his present  motives,  such as  that  of honour,  absurd,  and  pouring  mockery  and  contempt  on  the
passions  which  reach  out to the future  and promise happiness in it.  Is it
true,  is all that remains a mode of thought whose outcome on a personal
level is despair and on a theoretical level a philosophy of destruction? - I
believe that the nature of the after-effect of knowledge is determined by a
man's temperament: in addition to the after-effect described I could just as
easily imagine a different one,  quite  possible in individual instances, by
virtue of which a life  could  arise  much  simpler and  emotionally cleaner
than  our present life  is:  so that,  though  the old motives of violent desire
produced  by  inherited  habit  would  still  possess  their  strength,  they
would  gradually  grow  weaker  under  the  influence  of purifying  knowledge. In the end one would live among men and with oneself as in nature, without praising, blaming, contending, gazing contentedly, as though at
a spectacle, upon many things for which one formerly felt only fear. One
would be free of emphasis, and no longer prodded by the idea that one is
only  nature  or more  than  nature.  For  this  to  happen  one  would,  to  be
sure,  have  to  possess  the  requisite  temperament,  as  has  already  been
said:  a  firm,  mild  and  at  bottom  cheerful  soul,  a  temper  that  does  not
need to be on its guard against malice or sudden outbursts and in whose
utterances  there  is  nothing  of  snarling  and  sullenness  - those  familiar
tedious  qualities of old  dogs and  men who have long been  kept on  the
leash. A man from whom the ordinary fetters of life have fallen to such an
extent that he continues  to live only so as to know better must,  rather,
without  envy  or vexation  be  able  to  forgo  much,  indeed  almost  everything upon which  other men place value; that free, fearless hovering over men, customs,  laws  and  the traditional evaluations of things  must suffice
him as  the  condition  he  considers  most desirable.  He is happy to communicate  his joy in this  condition,  and  he has,  perhaps,  nothing else to communicate - which  involves,  to  be  sure,  one  more  privation and  renunciation. If more is nonetheless desired of him, he will,  with a benevolent  shake  of the  head,  point  to his  brother,  the  free  man of action,  and perhaps  not  conceal  a  certain  mockery in  doing  so:  for of his  'freedom'
there is a curious tale still to be told.
ON  THE HISTORY
OF THE
M O RAL SENSATIONS
Advantages of psychological observation. - That reflection on the human,  all
too  human  - or,  as  the  learned  expression  has  it:  psychological observation - is among the expedients by means of which one can alleviate the burden of living,  that practice in this art lends presence of mind in difficult situations and entertainment in tedious circumstances,  that one can, indeed,  pluck  useful  maxims  from  the  thorniest  and  most disagreeable
stretches  of one's  own  life  and  thereby  feel  a  little better:  that  was believed, that was known - in former centuries.  Why has it been forgotten by  this  century,  in  which,  at  least  in  Germany,  indeed  in  all  Europe,
poverty  in  psychological  observation  is  apparent  through  a  hundred
signs? Not especially in novels, novellas or philosophical writings - these
are the work of exceptional men; it is already more evident, however,  in
assessments  made  of  public  events  and  personalities:  but  the  art  of
psychological dissection and computation is lacking above all in the social
life of all classes,  in which,  while there may be  much talk about people,
there is none at all about man. But why is the richest and most inoffensive
material for conversation neglected in this way? Why does one not even
read the great masters of the psychological maxim any more? - for it can
be  said  without  any  exaggeration  that  it  is  hard  to  find  any  educated
person in Europe who has read Larochefoucauld* or those related to him
in style and spirit, and very much harder to find one who has read them
and  does  not  revile  them.  Even  this  uncommon  reader,  however,  will
probably  derive  much  less  pleasure  from  them  than  the  form  they
employ ought to give him; for even the most refined head is not in a position to appreciate the art of polishing maxims as it ought to be appreciated  if he  himself is  not drawn to it and  has  not competed in  it.  In the absence of such practical instruction,  one takes the creation and shaping
of maxims to be easier than it is,  one does not feel intensely enough the
charm and sense of achievement in it. That is why present-day readers of
maxims find relatively little to satisfy them,  indeed hardly more than a
mouthful of pleasantries;  so  that it is  with  them as it usually is with observers of cameos: who praise because they cannot love, and are quick to admire but  even quicker to go away.
)6
Objection. - Or is there a debit side to this proposition that psychological
•
Larochefoucauld:  Fran�ois,  Due  de  Larochefoucauld  (t6t3-8o):  French  writer  and
aphorist.
3 1
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
observation is one of the means of bestowing charm on existence and relieving  and  mollifying  it?  Ought  one  not  to  have been  sufficiently  convinced  of  the  unpleasant  consequences  of  this  art  to  want  now deliberately  to  direct  the  eyes  of anyone  in  process  of  formation  away
from it? A certain blind  faith in the goodness of human nature, an innate
aversion  to the dissection of human actions,  a kind of modesty in regard
to the nakedness of the soul may indeed be more desirable things for the
total  happiness  of  an  individual  than  that  psychological  perspicacity
which may be helpful in particular cases; and perhaps belief in goodness,
in virtuous men and actions, in an abundance of impersonal benevolence
in the world has in fact  made men better,  inasmuch as it has made them
less  mistrustful.  If one  enthusiastically  imitates  Plutarch's*  heroes  and
feels  a  repugnance  towards  suspiciously  probing  the  motives  of  their
actions, one may not be serving truth but one may well be furthering the
wellbeing of human  society:  psychological error and insensibility in this
domain  in  general  promotes  humanity,  while  knowledge  of  truth  perhaps  gains  for us one more hypothesis such as Larochefoucauld placed before the first edition of his Sentences et maximes morales: 'Ce que le monde
nomme vertu  n'est d'ordinaire qu'un fant6me forme par nos passions a  qui  on
donne  un  nom honnete pour faire  impunement ce  qu'on veut.'t Larochefoucauld  and  the  other  French  masters of psychical  examination  (to  whom there  has  lately  been  added  a  German,  the  author  of  the  Psychological
Observations)t  are  like  skilful  marksmen  who  again  and  again  hit  the
bullseye  - but  it  is  the  bullseye  of  human  nature.  Their  skill  evokes
amazement, but in the end a spectator inspired not by the spirit of science
but that of philanthropy execrates an art that appears to implant a sense
of suspicion and reductionism into the souls of men.
Nevertheless.  However credit and debit balance may stand: at its present
-
state as a specific individual science the awakening of moral observation
has become  necessary,  and  mankind  can  no longer be spared the cruel
sight  of the  moral  dissecting table and  its  knives  and  forceps.  For here
there rules  that  science  which asks after the origin and history of the socalled moral sensations and which as it progresses has to pose and solve the  sociological problems  entangled  with  them:  - the older philosophy
knows  nothing  of  the  latter  and  has,  with  paltry  evasions,  always
avoided investigation of the origin  and  history of the moral sensations.
With what consequences is now very clearly apparent, since it has been
demonstrated  in many  instances  how  the  errors  of thevgreatest philosophers usually have their point of departure in a false explanation of certain  human  actions  and  sensations;  how  on  the  basis  of an  erroneous
•  Plutarch: Greek biographer and essayist (c. 46 to c. 127); his Lives contain characterizations
of eminent Greeks and Romans.
t  'Ce que . . .  qu'on veut': That which the world calls virtue is usually nothing but a phantom
formed by our passions  to which we give an honest name so as to do what we wish with impunity.
t  The author of the Psychological Observations: Paul Ree, with whom Nietzsche was closely
acquainted (the book appeared  in 1875)-
J2
ON  THE  H I S T O RY  OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
analysis, for example that of the so-called unegoistic actions, a false ethics
is  erected,  religion  and  mythological  monsters  are  then  in  turn  called
upon to buttress it, and the shadow of these dismal spirits in the end falls
across even physics and the entire perception of the world.  If, however, it
is certain that superficiality in psychological observation has laid the most
dangerous traps for human judgement and reasoning and continues to
lay them, so now what is required is that perseverance in labour that does
not  weary  of  heaping  stone  upon  stone,  brick  upon  brick,  what  is
required  is  the  abstemious  courage  not  to  be  ashamed  of  such  modest
labour and to defy every attempt to disparage it. It is true that countless
individual  observations  regarding  the  human  and  all  too  human  have
first been discovered and  expressed in circles of society accustomed  to
sacrifice, not to scientific knowledge, but to intellectual coquetry; and the
odour of that ancient home of the moral maxim - a very seductive odour has  continued  to adhere  almost  inextricably to the  whole  genre:  so  that on  account  of  it  the  scientific  man  involuntarily  evidences  a  certain
distrust of this genre and of its seriousness.  But it suffices to point to the
consequences:  for  already  it  is  becoming  apparent  what  results  of  the
most serious description are emerging from the ground of psychological
observation.  For  what  is  the  principle  which  one  of  the  boldest  and
coldest of thinkers,  the author of the book On the Origin of the Moral Sensations,* arrived  at by  virtue of his  incisive  and  penetrating  analyses  of human action? 'Moral man',  he says,  'stands no closer to the intelligible
(metaphysical)  world  than  does  physical  man'.  This  proposition,
hardened and sharpened beneath the hammer-blow of historical knowledge,  may perhaps at some future time serve as the axe which is laid at the root of the 'metaphysical need' of man - whether as more of a blessing
than a curse to the general wellbeing, who can say? - but in any event as a
proposition with the weightiest consequences; at once fruitful and fearful
and  looking  out  upon  the  world  with  that  Janus-face  possessed  by  all
great perceptions.
To what extent useful. - Thus:  whether  psychological observation is more
advantageous or disadvantageous  to man may remain undecided; what
is  certain,  however,  is  that  it  is  necessary,  because  science  cannot  dispense with  it.  Science,  however,  knows  no  regard for final  objectives, just as nature knows  nothing of it:  but,  as the latter occasionally brings
into  existence  things  of  the  greatest  appropriateness  and  usefulness
without having willed them,  so genuine science, as the imitation of nature
in  concepts,  will  also  occasionally,  indeed  frequently  promote  the  wellbeing of mankind and achieve what is appropriate and useful - but likewise without having willed it.
He who finds the breath of such a way of thinking too wintry for him
perhaps has merely too little fire in him: if he cares to look around him,
•  The  author of the  book  On the Origin  of the Moral  Sensations:  again  Paul  Ree;  the  book,
which  is  Ree's  chief  work,  was  written  during  t87f>-7  in  the  house  in  Sorrento  in  which
Nietzsche was at the same time writing Human,  All Too Human.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
however, he will perceive illnesses that require icepacks,  and people so
'compounded together' of fire  and  spirit they are hard put to it to find air
cold  and  cutting  enough  for  them.  Moreover:  just  as  individuals  and
nations  too  much  given  to  seriousness  have  a  need  of frivolity,  just  as
others too excitable and emotional require from time to time the pressure
of a heavy burden if they are to stay healthy,  ought we, the more spiritual
men of an age which is visibly becoming more and  more  ignited,  not to
seize  hold on every means  there  is of extinguishing and cooling,  so that
we can remain at least as steady, inoffensive and moderate as we still are,
and  thus  perhaps one day be able to serve this age as its mirror and selfreflection? -
The fable of intelligible freedom.• - The principal stages in the history of the
sensations  by  virtue  of  which  we  make  anyone  accountable  for  his
actions,  that is to say, of the moral sensations, are as follows.  First of all,
one calls individual actions good or bad quite irrespective of their motives
but  solely  on  account  of  their  useful  or  harmful  consequences.  Soon,
however,  one  forgets  the origin of these designations and believes that
the  quality  'good'  and  'evil'  is  inherent in the  actions  themselves,  irrespective of their consequences: thus committing the same error as that by which language designates the stone itself as hard, the tree itself as green
- that is to say, by taking for cause that which is effect. Then one consigns
the  being  good  or  being  evil  to  the  motives  and  regards  the  deeds  in
themselves  as  morally  ambiguous.  One  goes  further  and  accords  the
predicate good or evil no longer to the individual motive but to the whole
nature of a man out of whom the motive grows as the plant does from the
soil.  Thus  one  successively  makes  men  accountable  for  the effects  they
produce,  then  for  their  actions,  then  for  their  motives,  and  finally  for
their  nature.  Now one  finally  discovers  that  this  nature,  too,  cannot be
accountable, inasmuch as it is altogether a necessary consequence and assembled from the elements and influence of things past and present: that is  to  say,  that  man  can  be  made  accountable  for  nothing,  not  for  his
nature, nor for his motives, nor for his actions, nor for the effects he produces.  One has thereby attained to the knowledge that the history of the moral  sensations  is  the  history  of an  error,  the  error  of accountability,
which  rests on  the  error of freedom of will.  - Schopenhauer concluded
otherwise,  thus:  because certain actions bring after them a feeling of displeasure ('consciousness of guilt'), there must exist a sense of accountability; for there  would be no ground for this feeling of displeasure if not only were all the actions of man determined by necessity - which is in fact the
case, a view also held by this philosopher - but man himself acquired his
entire  nature  with  this  same  necessity  - which  Schopenhauer  denies.
From the fact of that feeling of displeasure Schopenhauer believes he can
demonstrate a freedom which man must have acquired somehow, not in
•  Schopenhauer adhered  to  Kant's concept of intelligible  freedom  and  defends it in  On  the
Basis of Morality, ch. 2 section  to.
ON  THE  H I S T O RY  OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
respect of his actions  but in respect  to  his  nature:  freedom  to  be  thus or
thus,  that is to say,  not to act thus or thus.  From the esse, • the sphere of
freedom and accountability,  there follows in his opinion the operarit - the
sphere of strict causality,  necessity and  unaccountability.  That feeling of
displeasure appears to relate to the operari, to be sure - to that extent it is
in error - in truth,  however,  to the esse, which is the deed of the free will,
the basic cause of the existence of an individual: man becomes that which
he wills to become,  his  willing  precedes his existence.  - Here  the erroneous  conclusion  is  drawn  that  from  the  fact  of a  feeling  of displeasure there can be inferred the justification, the rational admissibility of this feeling  of  displeasure;  and  from  this  erroneous  conclusion  Schopenhauer arrives at his fantastic concept of so-called intelligible freedom. But a feeling of displeasure after a deed is absolutely not obliged  to be rational; on the contrary, it cannot be, since it rests precisely on the erroneous presupposition that that deed need not have taken place of necessity.  Thus: it is because man regards himself as free,  not because he is free,  that he feels
remorse and pangs of conscience. - This feeling is,  moreover,  something
one can  disaccustom oneself to,  and  many people do not feel it at all in
respect of actions which evoke it in others.  It is a very changeable thing,
tied to the evolution of morality and culture and perhaps present in only
a  relatively brief span  of world-history.  - No  one is accountable for  his
deeds,  no one for his nature;  to judge is the same thing as to be unjust.
This also applies when the individual judges himself. The proposition is
as clear as daylight, and yet here everyone prefers to retreat back into the
shadows and untruth: from fear of the consequences.
The over-animal. - The beast in us wants to be lied to; morality is an official
lie told so that it shall not tear us to pieces.  Without the errors that repose
in the assumptions of morality  man would  have  remained  animal.  As it
is,  he  has taken  himself for something higher and imposed  sterner laws
upon  himself.  That  is  why  he  feels  a  hatred  for  the  grades  that  have
remained  closer  to  animality:  which is the explanation  of the  contempt
formerly felt for the slave as a non-man, as a thing.
The unalterable character.:t. - That the character is unalterable is  not in the
strict  sense  true;  this  favourite  proposition  means  rather  no  more  than
that, during the brief lifetime of a man, the effective motives are unable to
scratch deeply enough to erase the imprinted script of many millennia. If
one imagines a man of eighty-thousand years, however, one would have
in him a character totally alterable: so that an abundance of different individuals  would  evolve  out  of  him  one  after  the  other.  The  brevity  of human life misleads us to many erroneous assertions regarding the qualities of man.
•  esse: being
t  operari: action,  manner of acting
t  The view that character is unalterable was held insistently by Schopenhauer; see his Essay
on the Freedom of the Will, ch.  3·
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
The order of desirable things and morality. - The  accepted  order of rank of
desirable  things,  according  to whether a  low,  higher or highest egoism
desires the one or the other,  now determines whether one is moral or immoral.  To prefer a low-esteemed thing (sensual pleasure, for example) to a  more  highly  valued  one  (health,  for  example)  counts  as  immoral;  as
does  preferring  luxury  to  freedom.  But  the  order  of  rank  of  desirable
things is not firm and the same at all times; if someone prefers revenge to
justice, according to the standard of an earlier culture he is moral, according to that of ours immoral. 'Immoral' therefore means that one is not yet, or not yet sufficiently sensible of the higher, more refined, more spiritual
motives  which  a  new  culture  has  introduced:  it  designates one  who  is
retarded,  has  remained  behind,  though  always  it  is  only  a  matter  of
degree.  - The  order  of rank  of desirable things  itself  is  not  erected  or
altered  in  accordance  with  moral  considerations;  but  once  it  has  been
established it then determines whether an action  is moral or immoral.
Cruel men as retarded men. - We have to regard men who are cruel as stages
of earlier cultures which have remained  behind:  the deeper formations in
the mountain of mankind which are otherwise hidden are here for once
laid open. They are retarded men whose brain has,  through some chance
or other in the course  of hereditary transmission,  failed to develop in as
sensitive and multifarious a way as is normal. They show us what we all
were,  and fill us with horror: but they themselves are as little accountable
for  it  as  a  piece  of  granite  is  for  being  granite.  Just  as  certain  human
organs recall the stage of evolution of the fish, so there must also be in our
brain grooves and convolutions that correspond to that cast of mind: but
these grooves and  convolutions are no longer the riverbed along which
the stream of our sensibility runs.
Gratitude and revenge. - The reason the man of power is grateful is this. His
benefactor has, through the help he has given him, as it were  laid hands
on the sphere of the man of power and intruded into it: now, by way of
requital, the man of power in turn lays hands on the sphere of his benefactor through the act of gratitude. It is a milder form of revenge. If he did not have the compensation of gratitude,  the man of power would have
appeared  unpowerful  and  thenceforth  counted  as  such.  That  is  why
every  community  of  the  good,  that  is  to  say  originally  the  powerful,
places  gratitude  among  its  first  duties.  Swift  suggested  that  men  are
grateful in the same degree as they are revengeful.
Twofold prehistory of good and evil. - The concept good and evil has a two-
fold prehistory: firstly in the soul of the ruling tribes and castes. He who
has the power to requite, good with good, evil with evil,  and also actually
ON  T H E   H I STORY  OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
practises requital  - is,  that is to say,  grateful and revengeful - is called
good; he who is powerless and cannot requite counts as bad.  As a good
man one belongs to the 'good', a community which has a sense of belonging  together  because  all  the  individuals  in  it  are  combined  with  one another through the capacity for requital.  As a bad man one belongs to
the 'bad',  to a swarm of subject, powerless people who have no sense of
belonging together.  The good are a  caste,  the bad a  mass like  grains of
sand. Good.and bad is for a long time the same thing as noble and base,
master and slave.  On the other hand, one does not regard the enemy as
evil: he can requite. In Homer the Trojan and the Greek are both good. It
is not he  who does us harm but he who is contemptible who counts as
bad. In the community of the good goodness is inherited; it is impossible
that a bad man could grow up out of such good soil.  If, however, one of
the  good  should  do  something  unworthy  of  the  good,  one  looks  for
excuses;  one ascribes the guilt to a god,  for example, by saying he struck
the good man with madness and rendered him blind. - Then in the soul of
the subjected, the powerless.  Here every other man, whether he be noble
or base,  counts as inimical,  ruthless, cruel, cunning, ready to take advantage. Evil is the characterizing expression for man, indeed for every living being one supposes to exist, for a god, for example; human, divine mean
the same thing as diabolical, evil.  Signs of goodness,  benevolence,  sympathy are received  fearfully as a trick, a prelude with a dreadful termination,  a  means  of  confusing  and  outwitting,  in  short  as  refined wickedness. When this disposition exists in the  individual a community
can hardly arise, at best the most rudimentary form of community: so that
wherever  this  conception  of good  and  evil reigns the  downfall  of such
individuals, of their tribes and races, is near. - Our present morality has
grown up in the soil of the ruling tribes and castes.
Sympathy more painful than suffering. - There are cases in which sympathy
for suffering is more painful than actual suffering. We find it more painful, for example,  when one of our friends makes himself guilty of something shameful than when we do so ourselves.  For we believe, firstly, in the purity of his character more than he does: then, probably precisely on
account of this belief,  our love for him is stronger than his own love for
himself. Even if his egoism really does suffer more than our egoism does,
inasmuch as he has to endure the evil consequences of his act more than
we do, nonetheless the unegoistic in us - this word is never to be taken in
a  strict sense but only as a simplified form of expression - is affected more
strongly by his guilt than is the unegoistic in him.
Hypochondria. - There are  people who out of empathy  with and concern
for another person become hypochondriac; the species of sympathy that
arises in  this  case  is  nothing other than an Ulness.  Thus  there  is also  a
Christian  hypochondria  such  as  overcomes  those  solitary,  religiously
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
inclined  people who  have  the suffering and  death of Christ continually
before their eyes.
Economy of goodness. - Goodness and love as the most salutary medicine in
traffic  between  men  are  such  precious  inventions  one  could  well  wish
they  might  be employed as economically as possible: but this is impossible.  Economy of goodness is the dream of the boldest utopians.
Benevolence. - Among the little but immeasurably frequent and thus very
influential  things  to  which  science  ought  to  pay  more  attention  than  to
the  great,  rare  things,  benevolence  too  is  to be reckoned;  I  mean  those
social  expressions  of  a  friendly  disposition,  those  smiles  of  the  eyes,
those handclasps, that comfortable manner with which almost all human
action is as a rule encompassed.  Every  teacher,  every official brings this
addition to what he does as a matter of duty; it is the continual occupation
of  humanity,  as  it  were  its  light-waves  in  which  everything  grows;
especially  within  the  narrowest  circle,  within  the  family,  is life  made  to
flourish only through  this benevolence. Good-naturedness,  friendliness,
politeness  of  the  heart  are  never-failing  emanations  of  the  unegoistic
drive and have played a far greater role in the construction of culture than
those much more celebrated expressions of it called pity, compassion and
self-sacrifice.  But  usually  they are neglected and undervalued; and there
is,  indeed,  very little  of the  unegoistic in  them.  The  sum  of these  small
doses is nonetheless enormous; their collective force is among the mightiest of forces. - One can likewise discover  much  more  happiness in  the world than clouded eyes  can see: one can do so if one calculates correctly
and  does  not overlook all those moments of pleasure in which every day
of even  the most  afflicted  human  life is rich.
The desire to excite pity.  Larochefoucauld  is  certainly  right when,  in the
-
most noteworthy passage of his self-portrait (first printed 1658), he warns
all those who possess reason against pity,  when he advises that it be left
to those people of the commonality who (because their actions are not determined by reason) require the passions if they are to be brought to the point of aiding a sufferer or energetically intervening in a case of misfortune; while pity,  in his (and Plato's) judgement,  enfeebles the soul.  One should, to be sure, manifest pity,  but take care not to possess it; for the unfortunate are so stupid that  the manifestation of pity constitutes for them the  greatest  good  in  the  world.  - Perhaps  one  can  warn  even  more
strongly  against  this having pity if one understands this need felt by the
unfortunate,  not  precisely  as  stupidity  and  intellectual  deficiency,  as  a
kind of mental disturbance that misfortune brings with it (that, indeed, is
how Larochefoucauld  seems  to conceive  it),  but as  something quite different and more suspicious. Observe children who weep and wail in order that  they  shall be  pitied,  and  ther:!fore wait for the  moment  when  their
condition will  be  noticed;  live among  invalids  and the mentally afflicted
ON  THE  H I S T O R Y   OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
and ask yourself whether their eloquent moaning and complaining, their
displaying of misfortune,  does  not fundamentally have the objective of
hurting those who are with  them:  the pity which these then express is a
consolation for the weak and suffering,  inasmuch as it shows them that,
all  their  weakness  notwithstanding,  they possess  at any  rate one power:
the power to hurt. In this feeling of superiority of which the manifestation
of  pity  makes  him  conscious,  the  unfortunate  man  gains  a  sort  of
pleasure; in the conceit of his imagination he is still of sufficient importance to cause affliction in the world. The thirst for pity is thus a thirst for self-enjoyment,  and  that at the expense of one's fellow men;  it displays
man  in the whole  ruthlessness of his own dear self: but not precisely in
his 'stupidity', as Larochefoucauld thinks. - In the conversations of social
life,  three-quarters  of  all  questions  are  asked,  three-quarters  of  all
answers given, in order to cause just a little pain to the other party; that is
why many people have such a thirst for social life: it makes them aware of
their  strength.  In  such  countless  but  very  small  doses  in  which  malice
makes itself felt it is a powerful stimulant to life: just as benevolence, disseminated through the human world in the same form, is the ever available  medicine.  - But will  there  be many  honest  men prepared  to  admit that causing pain gives pleasure? that one not seldom entertains oneself and entertains oneself well - by mortifying other people, at least in one's own mind, and by firing off at them the grapeshot of petty malice? Most
are too dishonest,  and a few too good,  to  know anything of this pudendum;� and they are welcome to deny if they like that Prosper Merimeet is right when he says: 'Sachez aussi qu'il n'y a rien de plus commun que de faire le
mal pour le plaisir de le fa ire. ':f:
How  appearance  becomes  being.  - Even  when  in  the  deepest  distress,  the
actor ultimately cannot cease to think of the impression he and the whole
scenic effect is making, even for example at the burial of his own child; he
will weep over his own distress and the ways in which it expresses itself,
as his own audience.  The hypocrite who always plays one and the same
role finally ceases  to be a hypocrite;  for example priests,  who as young
men  are  usually  conscious  or  unconscious  hypocrites,  finally  become
natural and then really are priests without any affectation; or if the father
fails to get that far then perhaps the son does so,  employing his father's
start and inheriting his habits.  If someone obstinately and for a long time
wants to appear something it is in the end hard for him to be anything else.
The profession of almost every man, even that of the artist, begins with
hypocrisy,  with  an imitation  from without,  with  a  copying of  what  is
most effective.  He who is always wearing a mask of a friendly countenance must finally acquire a power over benevolent moods without which
•  pude11dum: shameful  part
t  Prosper Merimee (18o3-70): French writer,  the author of Carmen
t  'Sachez aussi  . . .  de le faire': Know,  too,  that there is nothing more common than to do evil
for the pleasure of doing it.
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
the  impression  of friendliness  cannot  be obtained  - and  finally  these
acquire power over him,  he is benevolent.
The point of honesty in deception. - With all great deceivers there is a noteworthy occurrence to which they owe their power.  In the actual act of deception,  with all its preparations,  its enthralling in voice, expression and gesture,  in the  midst  of  the  scenery  designed  to  give  it effect,  they  are
overcome by  belief in  themselves:  it is  this  which  then  speaks  so  miraculously and compellingly to those who surround them. The founders of religions are distinguished from these great  deceivers by the fact that they never emerge from this state of self-deception: or very rarely they experience  for  once  that  moment  of  clarity  when  doubt  overcomes  them; usually,  however,  they comfort themselves by ascribing these moments
of clarity to the evil antagonist. Self-deception has to exist if a grand effect
is  to be produced.  For  men  believe in the  truth  of  that  which  is plainly
strongly believed.
Supposed stages of truth. - One of the commonest false conclusions is this:
because  someone  is  true  and  honest  towards  us,  he  speaks  the  truth.
Thus a child believes in the judgements of its parents, the Christian in the
assertions of the founder of the Church. There is likewise a disinclination
to admit  that all that which men have defended in earlier centuries with
sacrifice of happiness and life were nothing but errors: perhaps one says
they were stages of truth.  But what one thinks at bottom is that, if someone has honestly believed in something and has fought and died for his belief,  it would  be  altogether  too  unfair  if what  had  inspired  him  had
actually been no more than an error.  Such an event seems to go against
eternal justice; which is why the heart of sensitive people again and again
contradicts their head,  and decrees:  there absolutely must exist a necessary connection between  moral action and intellectual insight. Unhappily it is otherwise; for there is no such thing as eternal justice.
The lie. - Why do almost all people tell the truth in ordinary everyday life?
- Certainly not because a  god has forbidden them to  lie.  The  reason  is,
firstly  because  it  is  easier;  for  lying  demands  invention,  dissimulation
and  a  good  memory.  (Which  is  why  Swift  says  that  he  who  tells  a  lie
seldom  realizes  what  a  heavy  burden  he  has  assumed;  for,  in  order  to
maintain a lie,  he has to invent twenty more.) Then because, in straightforward relationships, it is advantageous to say:  I want this,  I have done that, and things of that kind; because, that is to say, the route of authority
and  compulsion  is  more  certain  than  that of cunning.  - If,  however,  a
child  should  have  been  brought  up  in  complicated  domestic  circumstances,  it  is just as  natural  for him  to employ  the  lie and  involuntarily always to say that which serves his interests; a sense of truth, an aversion
to lying as  such,  is quite foreign and inaccessible to him,  and thus he lies
in all innocence.
ON  T H E   H I S T O R Y   OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
Casting suspicion on morality on account of faith. - No power could maintain
itself  if  its  advocates  were  nothing  but  hypocrites;  however  many
'worldly' elements  it may  possess,  the  strength of the Catholic Church
rests on those priestly natures, still very numerous, whose lives are hard
and full of meaning and whose glance and wasted bodies speak of nightwatches,  fasting, fervent prayer, perhaps even of flagellation; these men deeply affect other men and inspire them with fear: what if it were needful
to live thus? - that is the dreadful question  the sight of them lays on the
tongue.  By propagating this doubt they continually establish further pillars of their power; even the free-thinkers do not dare to confront the man selfless in this way with a harsh sense of truth and say to him:  'Deceived
yourself,  cease to  deceive!' - It is only difference in insight that divides
them from him,  certainly no difference as regards goodness or badness;
but  what  one  does  not like  one  usually  also  treats  unjustly.  Thus  one
speaks  of  the  cunning  and  infamous  arts  of  the Jesuits,  but  overlooks
what self-overcoming every individual Jesuit  imposes  upon  himself and
that the alleviated practice  of life preached by  the Jesuit textbooks is intended  for  the  benefit  of  the  laity,  not  for  their  own.  One  may  ask, indeed, whether,  given quite the same tactics and organization,  we children of the Enlightenment would be equally good instruments or equally admirable in self-conquest,  indefatigability or devotedness.
Victory of knowledge over radical evil. - He who wants  to become wise will
profit greatly from at some time having harboured the idea that mankind
is fundamentally evil and corrupt: it is a false idea, as is its opposite; but it
enjoyed dominance throughout whole ages of history, and its roots have
branched out even into us ourselves and our world.  To understand ourselves we must understand it; but if we are then ourselves to rise higher, we  must  rise  up  above  it.  We  then  come  to  recognize  that  there  is  no
such  thing  as  sin  in  the  metaphysical  sense;  but,  in  the  same  sense,
no such thing as virtue either; that this whole domain of moral ideas is in
a state of constant fluctuation, that there exist higher and deeper conceptions of good and evil, of moral and immoral.  He who desires little more of things  than  knowledge  of them easily finds  repose of soul and  if he
blunders (or, as the world puts it,  sins), it will at most be through ignorance but hardly out of covetousness. He will no longer want to decry the desires  as  heretical  and  to  exterminate  them;  but  the  only  goal  which
completely dominates  him,  at all  times to know as fully  as possible,  will
make  him  cool  and  soothe  everything  savage  in  his  disposition.  Moreover, he will have got free of a host of tormenting ideas, the expressions
'pains of Hell',  'sinfulness',  'incapacity for good' will no longer have any
effect on him:  he will recognize in them only the hovering phantoms of
false ways of viewing life and the world.
Morality as the self-division of man .   A good author whose heart is really in
-
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
his subject wishes that someone would come and annihilate him by presenting  the  same  subject  with  greater  clarity  and  resolving  all  the questions contained in  it.  A  girl  in love  wishes  the  faithfulness  and devotion  of her  love  could  be  tested  by  the  faithlessness  of  the  man  she loves.  A  soldier wishes  he could fall on  the battlefield  for his victorious
fatherland; for his supreme desire is victor in the victory of his fatherland.
A mother gives to her child that of which she deprives herself, sleep, the
best  food,  if need  be  her health,  her strength. - But are  these all unegoistic states? Are these deeds of morality miracles because they are, in Schopenhauer's words, 'impossible and yet real'? Is it not clear that in all these instances  man  loves  something of himself,  an  idea,  a desire,  an offspring,
more than something else of himself, that he thus divides his nature and sacrifices one part of it to the  other?  Is it something essentially different from when  some obstinate man says: 'I would rather be shot down than move
an  inch  out  of  that  fellow's  way?'  - The  inclination for something (wish,
impulse,  desire) is present in all the above-mentioned instances; to give
in  to  it,  with  all  the consequences,  is in any  event  not  'unegoistic'. - In
morality man treats himself not as individuum but as dividuum.*
What one can promise. - One can promise  actions but not feelings;  for the
latter are involuntary. He who promises someone he will always love him
or always hate him or always be faithful to him,  promises something that
does  not  reside  in  his  power;  but  he  can  certainly  promise  to  perform
actions which, though they are usually the consequences of love,  hatred,
faithfulness,  can  also  derive  from  other  motives:  for  several  paths and
motives can lead to the same action.  To promise always to love someone
therefore means: for as long as I love you I shall render to you the actions
of love; if I cease to love you, you will continue to receive the same actions
from  me,  though from  other motives:  so that in the  heads of our fellow
men  the  appearance  will  remain  that  love  is  still  the  same  and
unchanged. - One therefore promises the continuation of the appearance
of love  when  one  swears  to  someone  ever-enduring  love  without  selfdeception.
Intellect and morality. - One has to have a good memory if one is to keep a
promise.  One  has to  have a  powerful  imagination  if one is to  feel  sympathy.  So closely is morality tied to the quality of the intellect.
6o
Revenge and the desire to revenge.  To desire to revenge and then to carry
-
out  revenge means to be  the  victim of a vehement attack  of fever which
then,  however,  passes:  but  to desire to revenge without possessing the
strength and  courage to carry out revenge means to carry about a chronic
illness, a poisoning of body and soul. Morality, which looks only at inten-
•  Terms  of  Scholastic  philosophy:  individuum:  that  which  cannot  be  divided  without
destroying its essence, dividuum: that which is composite and lacks an individual essence
ON  THE  H I ST O RY  OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
tions, assesses both cases equally; in the ordinary way the former case is
assessed as being the  worse  (on account of the evil consequences which
the  act  of  revenge  will  perhaps  produce).  Both  evaluations  are  shortsighted.
6t
The ability to wait. - Ability  to wait is so difficult an accomplishment that
the greatest poets have not disdained to make inability to wait a motif of
their poems. Thus did  Shakespeare  in  Othello,  Sophocles  in  Ajax:  if the
latter had  only  allowed  his feelings  to cool for one more day his suicide
would no longer have appeared  necessary,  as is indicated by the oracle;
probably he would  have  snapped his fingers at the horrible promptings
of his  wounded vanity and  said  to  himself:  who in  my  situation would
not have mistaken a sheep for a hero? is it something so very terrible? On
the contrary, it is something anyone would do: Ajax could console himself with such a reflection as that. Passion will not wait; the tragic element in the life of great men often lies not in  their conflicts with their age and
with the lowness of their fellow men, but in their inability to put off their
work for a year or two years; they cannot wait.  - In all cases of duels,  the
seconds have the duty to determine whether the contestants cannot wait:
if they cannot then a duel is reasonable, inasmuch as each of them says to
himself: 'either I live on,  in which event he dies this instant, or the other
way round'. In such a case waiting would mean protracting the torments
of wounded honour in the face of him who has wounded it, and this can
be more painful than life is worth.
Revelling  in  revenge.  - Uncultivated  people  who  feel  insulted  are  accustomed  to  set  the  degree  of  insultingness  as  high  as  possible  and  to recount the cause of the insult in strongly exaggerated terms, so as to be
able  really  to  revel  in  the  feeling  of  hatred  and  revengefulness  thus
engendered.
Value of diminution. - There are not a few people  (perhaps it is even most
people)  who,  in order to maintain  in  themselves  a  sense of self-respect
and a certain efficiency in action, are obliged to disparage and diminish in
their  minds  all  the  other  people  they  know.  Since,  however,  petty
natures are in the majority,  <md it matters very much whether they  possess or lose this efficiency, it follows -
The rager. - We  should  beware  of someone  raging  at  us  as of one  who
would like to take our life: for that we are still alive is due to the absence of
the  power to kill;  if looks sufficed it would  long since  have been  all  up
with  us.  It  is  a  piece of a  ruder  stage  of culture  to  reduce  a  person  to
silence  by  making  a  visible  presentation  of physical  savagery  and  thus
inspiring fear in him. - Likewise, that cold glance that the noble reserve
for  their  servants  is  a  remnant  of ancient  caste-divisions  between  man
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
and man, a piece of rude antiquity; women, the custodians of the ancient,
have preserved this relic too more faithfully.
6s
Whither  honesty  can  lead.
Someone  had  the  bad  habit  of  occasionally
-
examining the motives of his actions, which were as good and bad as the
motives of  everyone  else,  and  honestly  saying  what  they  were.  He excited at first revulsion,  then suspicion,  gradually became altogether proscribed and declared an outlaw in society, until finally the law took notice of this infamous being on occasions when usually it closed its eyes. Lack
of ability to keep  silent about the universal secret,  and the irresponsible
tendency  to  see  what  no  one  wants  to see - himself - brought him  to
prison and  a premature death.
Punishable,  never punished.  - Our crime against criminals  consists in the
fact that we treat them like scoundrels.
Sancta simplicitas of r!rtue. * - Every virtue has its privileges: for example,
that  of bringing  to  a  condemned  man's  stake  its  own  little  bundle  of
wood.
Morality and success. - It is not only the spectators of an act who usually
assess its morality or immorality according to whether or not it is successful:  no,  the  performer  himself does  so.  For  the  motives  and  intentions behind  it are  seldom  sufficiently clear and  simple,  and  sometimes even
the  memory  seems  to be muddled by the  success  of an act,  so that one
foists false motives upon one's act oneself, or treats inessential motives as
essential.  Success often bestows upon an act the whole honest lustre of
the good  conscience,  a  failure  casts  the  shadow of pangs of conscience
over the most estimable deed. From this there follows the familiar practice of the politician,  who thinks: 'only give me success: if I have success I shall also have  brought  every  honest  soul  over  to  my  side - and made
myself honest in  my  own  eyes  too'. - In a  similar way,  success  is  supposed to be a substitute for greater validity.  Even today many educated people think that  the victory of Christianity  over Greek philosophy is a
proof of the superior truth of the former - although in this case it was only
the coarser and more violent that conquered the more spiritual and delicate.  So far as superior truth is concerned, it is enough to observe that the awakening sciences have allied themselves point by point with the philosophy of Epicurus but point by point rejected Christianity.+
6<)
Love and justice.  - Why is love  overestimated  as compared  with justice,
•  SQncta simplicitas: holy simplicity
t Epicurus  (341-270  BC):  Greek  philosopher,  the  founder of  the  philosophy named after
him which  shared  with Stoicism the  allegiance  of the Graeco-Roman world  during the centuries  preceding  the  rise  of Christianity.  See The Gay  Science,  book I,  section 45,  and  Kaufmann's commentary (New  York:  Vintage Books,  1974,  p.  no).
ON  T H E   H I ST O R Y   OF  T H E   M O R A L   S EN S A T I O N S
and the fairest things said of it, as though it were of a far higher nature
than the latter? For is it not obviously the stupider of the two? - Certainly,
but for precisely that reason so much more pleasant for everybody.  It is
stupid and possesses a rich cornucopia; out of this it distributes its gifts,
and does so to everyone, even when he does not deserve them, indeed
does  not  even  thank  it for  them.  It is  as  impartial  as  the  rain,  which,
according to the Bible and in accordance too with experience, soaks not
only the unjust man but, in certain circumstances, also the just man to the
skin.
Execution.  - How  is  it  that  every  execution  offends  us  more  than  a
murder? It is the  coldness of the judges, the scrupulous preparation, the
insight that  here  a  human being is being used  as a  means of deterring
others.  For it is not the guilt that is being punished, even when it exists:
this lies in educators, parents, environment, in 1:1s, not in the murderer - I
mean the  circumstances  that caused him to become one.
Hope.  - Pandora  brought  the  box  containing  the  evils and  opened  it.  It
was the gift of the gods to  mankind,  outwardly a fair,  seductive gift and
named the 'box of good fortune' .  Then all the evils, living winged creatures, flew out: since then they have been hovering about doing harm to men by  day and night.  A  single evil had not yet slipped out of the box:
then,  by  the  will  of Zeus,  Pandora  shut  the  lid,  and  thus  it remained
within. Now man has the box of good fortune forever in the house and is
amazed  at the  treasure  he  possesses  in  it;  it stands at  his  service,  he
reaches for it when he desires to do so; for he does not know that the box
Pandora  brought  was  the  box  of  evil  and  regards  the  evil  that  has
remained behind as the greatest piece of good fortune - it is hope. - For
what Zeus  wanted was  that man,  though  never so  tormented  by  the
other evils,  should  nonetheless  not throw life away but continue to let
himself be tormented. To  that end he gives men hope:  it is in truth the
worst of all evils, because it protracts the torment of men.
Degree of moral  inflammability  unknown.  - Whether  or  not  our  passions
glow red hot and direct the whole course of our life depends on whether
or not we have had certain painfully affecting sights and impressions - a
father unjustly condemned, killed or tortured, for example, an unfaithful
wife, a cruel attack by an enemy. No one knows whither circumstances,
pity, indignation may drive him, no one knows the degree of his inflammability. Paltry little circumstances make one paltry oneself; it is usually not the quality of his experiences but their quantity that distinguishes the
lower from the higher man, in both good and evil.
The unwilling martyr. - In a party there was a man who was too fearful and
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
cowardly ever to contradict  his comrades:  they employed  him in every
kind of service,  they demanded everything of him,  because he was more
afraid of the ill opinion of his companions than he was of death;  he was a
miserably feeble soul.  They recognized this and on the basis of the qualities mentioned made of him a hero and finally even a martyr.  Although the cowardly man inwardly always said No, with his lips he always said
Yes,  even  on  the  scaffold  when  he  died  for  the  views  of his  party:  for
beside him there stood one of his old party comrades, who by word and
glance  so  tyrannized  over  him  that  he  actually  suffered  death  without
flinching and  has  since  then been  celebrated  as a  martyr  and  a man  of
great character.
Everyday standard. - One will  seldom go  wrong if one attributes extreme
actions  to  vanity,  moderate ones to habit and petty ones to  fear.
Misunderstanding of virtue. - He who has come to know unvirtue in associ-
ation with pleasure - such as he who has a dissolute youth behind him imagines  that virtue  must  be associated with the  unpleasurable.  He,  on the contrary, who is much tormented by his passions and vices longs for
peace  and  happiness of soul  in the  practice  of virtue.  It is  thus  possible
that two  virtuous people completely misunderstand one another.
The ascetic. - The ascetic makes of virtue a state of distress.
Honour  transferred from  the  person  to  the  thing.
Acts  of  love  and  self-
-
sacrifice for the good of one's neighbour are generally held in honour in
whatever  circumstances  they  may  be  performed.  In  this  way  one  augments the value of the things which are loved in this fashion or for which someone sacrifices himself: even though in themselves they may perhaps
not be  worth very much. A brave army is a convincing  argument for the
cause for which it fights.
Ambition a surrogate for moral feeling. - Moral feeling must not be lacking in
those  natures  that  have  no  ambition.  The  ambitious  contrive  to  get  on
even  without  it,  and with  almost equal  success.  - That is  why,  if they
should  ever  lose  moral  feeling,  the  sons  of  modest  families  that  know
nothing  of  ambition  decline  very  rapidly  into  complete  good-fornothings.
Vanity enriches.  - How  poor the  human  spirit  would be  without  vanity!
But for this reason it resembles a well-stocked and continually restocked
department  store  that  entices  customers  of  every  kind:  they  can  find
ON  T H E   H I S T O R Y   OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
almost anything,  have almost anything,  provided they bring witfi them
the valid coin (admiration).
8o
Old age and  death.
Disregarding  the  demands  made  by  religion  one
-
might  well  ask:  why  should  it  be  more  laudable  for  an  old  man  who
senses the decline of his powers to await his slow exhaustion and dissolution than in  full consciousness to  set himself a limit? Suicide is in this case a wholly natural and obvious action,  which as  a victory for reason
ought fairly to awaken reverence: and did awaken it in those ages when
the  heads  of  Greek  philosophy  and  the  most  upright  Roman  patriots
were accustomed to die by suicide. On the other hand, the desire to carry
on existing from day to day,  anxiously consulting physicians and observing scrupulous rules of conduct, without the strength to get any closer to the actual goal of one's life,  is much less respectworthy. - The religions
are rich in excuses  for  evading the  demand of suicide:  in this way they
ingratiate themselves with those who are in love with life.
Errors of  the sufferer and the doer.  When  a rich man takes a  possession
-
from a poor one (for example, a prince robs a plebeian of his beloved) an
error arises in the poor man: he thinks the rich man must be utterly infamous to take from him the little that he has.  But the rich man does not feel nearly  so  deeply  the  value  of a  single  possession  because  he  is used  to
having many:  thus he cannot transport himself into the soul of the poor
man and has not committed nearly so great an injustice as the latter supposes. Both have a false idea of one another. The injustice of the powerful which  arouses  most  indignation  in  history  is  not  nearly  as  great  as  it
seems. The inherited sense of being a higher type of creature with higher
claims already makes such a man fairly cold and leaves his conscience at
rest:  we  all,  indeed,  lose all feeling of injustice when the difference between ourselves and other creatures is very great, and will kill a gnat, for example, without the slightest distress of conscience. Thus it is no sign of
baseness in Xerxes (whom even the Greeks depict as being outstandingly
noble) when  he  takes  a  son  from his  father and  has  him dismembered
because  he  has  expressed  fearful  and  ominous  misgivings  about  the
whole campaign  they are engaged  on:  in this instance the individual is
disposed of like an annoying insect: he is too lowly to be allowed to go on
upsetting a world-ruler.  Indeed,  no cruel man is so cruel as he whom he
has misused believes; the idea of pain is not the same thing as the suffering of it.  The same applies to the unjust judge,  to the journalist who misleads public opinion with petty untruths. Cause and effect are in all these cases surrounded by  quite different groups of thoughts and sensations;
while one involuntarily presupposes that doer and sufferer think and feel
the same and, in accordance with this presupposition, assesses the guilt
of the one by the pain of the other.
Skin of the soul. - Just as the bones, flesh, intestines and blood vessels are
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O  H U M A N
enclosed  in a  skin  that  makes  the  sight  of man  endurable,  so the  agitations and passions of the soul are enveloped in vanity:  it is the skin of the soul.
Sleep of virtue. - When virtue has slept it will arise more vigorous.
Refinement of shame. - Men are not ashamed of thinking something dirty,
but they are when they imagine they are credited with this dirty thought.
Wickedness is rare. - Most people are much too much occupied with themselves to be wicked.
The index of the scales. - We praise or blame according to whether the one
or the other offers  a greater opportunity  for our power of judgement to
shine  out.
Luke 18, 14 improved.* - He that humbleth himself wants to be exalted.
Prevention of suicide. - There exists a right by which we  take a man's life
but  none by which we take from  him  his death:  this is mere cruelty.
Vanity.  - We  have  an  interest  in  the  good  opinion  of  others,  firstly
because it is useful  to  us,  then  because  we  want  to give  them pleasure
(children  their  parents,  pupils  their  teacher,  and  benevolent people  all
other  people  in  general).  Only  where  the  good  opinion  of  others  is
important  to  someone  quite  apart  from  advantage  or  the  desire  to
give pleasure do we speak  of vanity.  In this case a person  wants to give
pleasure to himself but at the expense of his fellow men,  inasmuch as he
either seduces them to a false opinion regarding himself or even aims at a
degree of  'good opinion'  that is bound  to be  painful to others  (through
the arousal of envy). As a rule,  the individual wants through the opinion
of others to confirm the opinion he has of himself and to ratify himself in
his own eyes; but our mighty habituation to authority - a habituation that
is as old as mankind itself - also impels many to rely on authority for their
belief in themself,  that is to say to acquire it only at the hands of others:
they  trust  the judgement of others  more than  they do  their own.  - Interest in oneself, the desire to feel pleasure,  attains in the vain person to such an intensity that he seduces others to a false,  much too high assessment of himself, yet then submits to the authority of these others: that is to say,  he induces error and then believes in this error. - One is therefore
bound to see that  vain people desire  to please  not so much other people
•  Luke  18,  14:  'for every one  that exalteth  himself  shall be abased; and  he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted'.
ON  T H E   H I ST O R Y   OF  T H E   M O RA L   S E N S A T I O N S
as themselves, and that they go so far as to neglect their own advantage
in doing so; for they are then obliged to arouse in their fellow men ill-will,
hostility and envy, simply so as to be able to take pleasure in themselves.
Boundary  of  philanthropy.  Anyone  who  has  declared  another  to  be  an
-
idiot, an unpleasant fellow, is annoyed if in the end he demonstrates that
he is not one.
Moralite  larmoyante. •  - How  much  entertainment  morality  provides!
Think only what an ocean of delicious tears has flowed,  for instance,  at
the telling of tales of noble, magnanimous deeds! - This embellishment of
life would disappear if belief in total unaccountability came to prevail.
Origin of justice. - Justice (fairness)  originates between parties of approximatE:ly equal power, as Thucydidest  correctly grasped (in the terrible colloquy between the Athenian and Melian ambassadors): where there is no clearly  recognizable  superiority  of  force  and  a  contest  would  result  in
mutual injury producing no decisive outcome the idea arises of coming to
an  understanding  and  negotiating  over  one  another's  demands:  the
characteristic  of  exchange  is  the  original  characteristic  of  justice.  Each
satisfies the other,  inasmuch as each acquires what he values more than
the other does. One gives to the other what he wants to have, to be henceforth his own, and in return receives what one oneself desires. Justice is thus  requital  and  exchange  under  the  presupposition  of  an  approximately equal power position: revenge therefore belongs originally within the domain of justice, it is an exchange. Gratitude likewise. - Justice goes
back naturally to the viewpoint of an enlightened self-preservation,  thus
to the  egoism of the reflection:  'to what end should I  injure  myself uselessly  and  perhaps  even  then  not achieve  my  goal?' - so much for the origin of justice.  Since,  in  accordance  with  their intellectual  habit,  men
have forgotten the original purpose of so-called just and fair actions,  and
especially because children have for millennia been trained to admire and
imitate such actions,  it has gradually come to appear that a just action is
an unegoistic one:  but  it  is  on  this  appearance  that  the  high  value  accorded it depends; and this high value is, moreover, continually increasing,  as  all  valuations  do:  for  something  highly  valued  is  striven  for, imitated,  multiplied through sacrifice, and grows as the worth of the toil
and zeal expended by each individual is added to the worth of the valued
thing. - How little moral would the world appear without forgetfulness!
A poet could say that God has placed forgetfulness as a  doorkeeper on
the threshold of the temple of human dignity.
Of  the  rights of the  weaker.  If  someone,  a  besieged  town  for  instance,
-
•  rnoralite larmoyante:  tearful  morality
t Thucydides (c. 46o--394 BC): Greek historian,  prindpally of the Peloponnesian War
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
submits under conditions to a stronger force,  the counter-condition is that
one  is  able  to  destroy  oneself,  burn  the  town  down,  and  thus  inflict  a
great Joss  upon the  stronger.  For this reason there here  arises  a kind of
equalization  on  the  basis  of which  rights  can  be  established.  The  enemy
derives advantage from preserving them. - To this extent there also exist
rights as between slaves and masters, that is to say to precisely the extent
that  the  possession  of the  slave  is  useful  and  important  to  his  master.
Rights originally extend just as far as one appears valuable,  essential,  un
Josable,  unconquerable  and  the  like,  to  the  other.  In  this  respect  the
weaker too possess  rights, but more limited ones.  Thence the celebrated
unusquisque tantum juris habet, quantum potentia valet (or more exactly: quantum potentia valere creditur).*
The  three  phases  of morality  hitherto.  It  is  the  first  sign  that  animal  has
-
become man when his actions are no longer directed to the procurement
of momentary wellbeing but  to  enduring  wellbeing,  that man  has  thus
become attuned to utility and purpose: it is then that the free domination of
reason first breaks forth.  An  even  higher stage is attained  when  he acts
according  to  the  principle  of  honour;  in  accordance  with  this  he  orders
himself with regard to others,  submits  to common sensibilities, and that
raises him high above the phase in which he is diverted only by utility understood in a purely personal sense: he accords others respect and wants them to accord respect to him, that is to say: he conceives utility as being
dependent  on  what  he  thinks  of  others  and  what  they  think  of  him.
Finally,  at  the  highest stage  of  morality  hitherto,  he  acts  in  accordance
with  his  own  standard  with  regard  to men  and things:  he  himself  determines  for  himself  and  others  what  is  honourable  and  useful;  he  has become the lawgiver of opinion, in accordance with an ever more highly
evolving  conception  of  usefulness  and  honourableness.  Knowledge
qualifies  him to prefer the most useful, that is to say general and  enduring  utility,  to  personal  utility,  general and  enduring  honour and  recognition  to  momentary  honour  and  recognition:  he  Jives  and  acts  as  a collective-individual.
Morality of the mature individual.  Hitherto  the  impersonal has been  re-
-
garded as the actual distinguishing mark  of the  moral  action; and it has
been proved that at first it was on account of their general utility that impersonal actions  were universally commended and accorded distinction.
Ought a significant alteration in this point of view  not to lie just ahead,
now when it is realized more and more that it is in precisely the most personal possible considerations that the degree of utility is at its greatest also for the generality: so that it is the strictly personal action that corresponds
to the current conception of morality (as general utility)? To make of oneself a complete person, and in all that one does to have in view the highest
•  Ultusquisque . . .  valet:  each man  has  as  much  right  as  he has  power;  quantum  . . .  creditur:
as he is believed to have power; Spinoza, Tractatus Politicus,  ch.  2,  section 8.
ON  THE  H I STORY  OF  T H E   M O RA L   SE N S A T I O N S
good of this person - that gets us further than those pity-filled agitations
and actions for the sake of others. We all of us, to be sure, still suffer from
the all-too-little regard paid to the personal in us, it has been badly cultivated - let us admit to ourselves that our minds have, rather, been drawn forcibly away from it and offered as a sacrifice to the state,  to science,  to
those in need, as though what would have to be sacrificed was in any case
what was bad.  Even now let us work for our fellow men, but only to the
extent  that  we  discover  our  own  highest  advantage  in  this  work:  no
more,  no  less.  All  that  remains  is  what  it  is  one  understands  by  one's
advantage;  precisely  the  immature,  undeveloped,  crude  individual  will
understand it most crudely.
Custom and what is in accordance with it. - To be moral,  to act in accordance
with custom,  to be ethical  means  to practise obedience towards a law or
tradition  established  from  of  old.  Whether  one  subjects  oneself  with
effort or gladly and willingly makes no difference,  it is enough that one
does it. He is called 'good' who does what is customary as if by nature, as
a result of a long inheritance, that is to say easily and gladly, and this is so
whatever what is customary may be (exacts revenge,  for example,  when
exacting  revenge  is  part  of  good  custom,  as  it  was  with  the  ancient
Greeks). He is called good because he is good 'for something'; since, however,  benevolence,  sympathy  and  the  like  have  throughout  all  the changes in customs always been seen as 'good for something', as useful,
it is now above all the benevolent,  the helpful who are called 'good'.  To
be  evil  is  'not  to act  in  accordance  with  custom',  to  practise  things  not
sanctioned by custom, to resist  tradition,  however rational or stupid that
tradition may be; in  all the laws of custom of all times,  however,  doing
injury to one's neighbour has been seen as injurious above all else, so that
now at the word 'evil' we think especially of voluntarily doing injury to
one's neighbour.  'Egoistic'  and 'unegoistic'  is not the fundamental antithesis which has led men to make the distinction between 'in accordance with  custom'  and  'in  defiance  of custom',  between  good  and  evil,  but
adherence to a tradition,  a law, and severance from it.  How the tradition
has arisen is here a matter of indifference, and has in any event nothing to
do with good and evil or with any kind of immanent categorical imperative;* it is above all directed at the preservation of a community, a people; every superstitious usage which has arisen on the basis of some chance
event  mistakenly  interpreted  enforces  a  tradition  which  it is  in  accordance with custom to follow; for to sever oneself from it is dangerous, and even more injurious to the community than to the individual (because the
gods punish the community for misdeeds and for every violation of their
privileges and only to that extent punish the individual).  Every tradition
now continually grows more venerable the farther away its origin lies and
the more  this  origin  is  forgotten;  the  respect paid  to  it increases  from
•  Kant considered the categorical imperative - defined in the Groundwork for a Metaphysic of
Morals  as  'Act  as  if  the  "laxim  of  your action  were  to  become  through your will a universal
natural law' - to derive from the nature of rationality.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
generation to generation,  the tradition at last becomes holy and evokes
awe and reverence; and  thus the morality of piety is in any event a much
older morality than that which demands unegoistic actions.
Pleasure in custom.  An important species of pleasure,  and  thus an  im-
-
portant source of custom,  originates in habit.  One does what is habitual
better and  more  easily  and  thus  prefers  to  do it,  one derives a sense of
pleasure from it and knows from experience that the habitual has proved
itself  and  is  thus  useful;  a  custom one can  live  with  is demonstrated as
salutary,  beneficial,  in  contrast  to  all  novel  experimentations  that  have
not  yet  proved  themselves.  Custom  is  consequently  the  union  of  the
pleasant  and  the  useful,  and  in  addition  it  demands  no  cogitation.  As
soon as man is in a position to exercise compulsion he exercises it to introduce and  impose his customs, for to him they are demonstrated practical wisdom. A community of individuals likewise compels each separate individual to observe the same custom.  Here there is the false conclusion: because  one  feels  happy  with  a  custom,  or  at least  can preserve one's
existence by means of it, this custom is necessary, for it counts as the sole
condition under which one  can feel  happy;  a happy  life seems to  derive
from  this custom alone.  This  conception of the customary as a condition
of existence  is  conveyed  into  the  minutest  particulars  of custom:  since
insight into  actual  causality is very  slight  among  the lower peoples  and
cultures,  one  sees  to  it with  superstitious fear that  everything continues
on in the way it has always  gone; even when custom is hard,  rigorous,
burdensome,  it is preserved on account of its apparent supreme utility.
One  does  not  know  that  the  same  degree  of wellbeing  can  also  exist
under  different customs or that even higher degrees are  attainable.  But
one does perceive that all  customs,  even the harshest,  grow milder and
more pleasant in course of time,  and that even the strictest mode of life
can become habitual and thus a source of pleasure.
Pleasure and social instinct. - From his relations with other men, man adds
a new species of pleasure to those pleasurable sensations he derives from
himself; whereby he significantly enlarges the domain of pleasurable sensations  in  general.  Perhaps  he  has already  inherited  much  that has  its place here  from the  animals,  who plainly feel pleasure when they play
with one another, especially the mothers with the young. Then consider
sexual  relations,  through  which  more  or less  every  female  appears  interesting to every male with regard to the prospect of pleasure,  and the reverse.  To feel sensations of pleasure on the basis of human relations on
the  whole  makes  men  better;  joy,  pleasure,  is  enhanced  when  it  is
enjoyed together with others, it gives the individual security, makes him
good-natured,  banishes distrust and  envy: for one feels a  sense  of wellbeing  and  sees  that others are likewise feeling a sense of wellbeing. Similar expressions of pleasure awaken the fantasy of empathy,  the  feeling  of being like something else: the same effect is produced by common suffer-
ON  THE  H I STORY  OF  T H E   M O RA L   S E N S A T I O N S
ings, by experiencing bad weather, dangers, enemies in common. It is no
doubt  upon  this  that  the  oldest  form  of alliance  is  based:  the  sense  of
which is that to act together to ward off and dispose of a threatening displeasure is of utility to each individual. And thus the social instinct grows out of the feeling of pleasure.
The  innocent element in  so-called evil acts.  - All  'evil' acts  are  motivated by
the drive to preservation or, more exactly, by the individual's intention of
procuring  pleasure  and  avoiding  displeasure;  so  motivated,  however,
they  are  not  evil.  'Procuring  pain  as  such'  does not exist,  except  in  the
brains of philosophers,  neither does 'procuring pleasure as such' (pity in
the Schopenhauerian  sense).  In conditions obtaining before the existence
of the state we kill the creature, be it ape or man, that seeks to deprive us
of a fruit of the tree if we happen to be hungry and are making for the tree
ourself: as we would still do to the animals even now if we were travelling
in  inhospitable regions. - The evil acts at which we are now most indignant rest on the error that he who perpetrates them against us possesses free  will,  that  is  to  say,  that  he  could  have  chosen  not  to  cause  us  this
harm.  It  is  this belief in  choice  that  engenders  hatred,  revengefulness,
deceitfulness, all the degrading our imagination undergoes, while we are
far less censorious towards an animal because we regard it as unaccountable.  To  do injury not from the drive  to preservation but as requital - is the  consequence  of a  mistaken judgement and therefore likewise  innocent.  In  conditions  obtaining  before  the  existence  of the  state  the  individual  can  act harshly  and  cruelly for the purpose  of frightening other creatures:  to secure his existence through such fear-inspiring tests of his
power. Thus does the man of violence, of power, the original founder of
states, act when he subjugates the weaker. His right to do so is the same
as the state now relegates to itself; or rather, there exists no right that can
prevent this from  happening.  The ground  for any kind  of  morality can
then  be  prepared  only  when  a  greater  individual  or  a  collectiveindividuality,  for  example  society,  the  state,  subjugates  all  other  individuals,  that is to say draws them out of their isolation and orders them within a collective.  Morality is preceded by compulsion,  indeed it is for a
time itself still  compulsion,  to which one  accommodates  oneself  for  the
avoidance  of  what  one  regards  as  unpleasurable.  Later  it  becomes
custom,  later still voluntary obedience,  finally  almost instinct:  then,  like
all that has for a long time been habitual and natural,  it is associated with
pleasure - and is now called virtue.
Shame. - Shame exists wherever there exists a 'mystery'; this, however, is
a  religious  concept which  in earlier ages of human culture  was of wide
compass. Everywhere there were enclosed domains to which divine right
denied entry except  under certain  conditions:  in the first instance these
were simply areas of ground,  inasmuch as certain places were not to be
stepped upon by  the  feet of the  uninitiated,  who were seized with  fear
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
and trembling when they approached them. This feeling was transferred
to  many  other  regions,  for  example  to  that  of  sexual  relations,  from
which,  as a privilege and adytum* of maturity, the gaze of youth must for
its own advantage be  directed  away:  relations  for whose protection and
the  preservation  of  whose  sanctity  many  divinities  were  thought  of  as
active and set up as guardians of the marriage chamber. (That is why this
chamber is called in Turkish the  harem,  the  'sanctuary', the  same word,
that  is  to  say,  normally  used  to  designate  the  forecourt  of a  mosque.)
Thus  kinghood  is,  as a  centre  from  which  power  and  glory  radiate,  a
mystery full of shame and secrecy to those subject to it: the force of which
is  still  perceptible  among  nations  otherwise  in  no  way  noted  for being
ashamed and abashed.  The whole world of interior  states,  the  so-called
'soul', is likewise  still a mystery to all non-philosophers; through endless
ages it has been believed that the 'soul' was of divine origin and worthy of
traffic  with  the gods: consequently it is an adytum and evokes shame.
Judge  not.  When  considering  earlier  periods  of history  one  must  take
-
care  not  to  fall  into  an  unjust  condemnation  of  them.  The  injustice
involved  in  slavery,  the  cruelty  involved  in  the  subjugation of persons
and  nations  is  not  to  be  measured  by  our own  standards.  For in  those
days the instinct for justice had not yet been so far developed.  Who dare
reproach the Genevan Calvin for having burned the physician Serveto?t It
was  a consistent action that flowed  from  his  convictions,  and  the  Inquisition  too  was  equally justified;  only  the  views  that then predominated were false and led to  consequences  that seem to us harsh because those
views have become alien to us.  And what in any event is the burning of a
single  individual  compared  with  everlasting  punishment  in  Hell  for
almost everybody!  And yet this idea dominated all the world at that time
without  its much  greater horrors  doing any essential damage to the idea
of a God . With us, too,  political sectarians are treated harshly and cruelly,
but  because  one has  learned  to believe in the necessity of the state one is
not as sensible of the cruelty as one is in the former case,  where we repudiate  the  ideas  behind  it.  The  cruelty  towards  animals  exhibited  by children and Italians is attributable to want of understanding; the animal
has,  especially in the interest of ecclesiastical teaching, been placed too
far below  man.  - Much that is horrific and inhuman in history in which
one can hardly bear to believe is likewise  ameliorated when we consider
that he who ordered it and he who carried it out are different people: the
former  does  not see it and  his imagination  therefore  receives no  strong
impression of it,  the latter obeys one set above him and does not feel responsible. From lack of imagination most princes and military leaders can easily  seem cruel and harsh without being so. - Egoism is not evil, because
the idea of one's 'neighbour' - the  expression  is of Christian  origin and
does not correspond with truth - is very weak in us; and we feel almost as
•  adytum:  innermost chamber of a temple, where oracles are delivered
t  Miguel  Serveto  (151 1-53):  Spanish  doctor  and  theologian.  Calvin  allegedly  denounced
him to the Inquisition as a unitarian; he was burned in Geneva.
ON  THE  H I STORY  OF  T H E   M OR A L  S E N S A T I O N S
free  of responsibility  for  him  as we do for  plants  and  stones.  That  the
other suffers has to be learned; and it can never be learned fully.
'Man's actions are always good. ' - We  do not accuse  nature of immorality
when it sends us a thunderstorm and makes us wet: why do we call the
harmful man immoral? Because in the latter case we assume a voluntarily
commanding free will,  in the former necessity.  But this distinction is an
error.  And than: we do not call even intentional harming immoral under
all circumstances; one unhesitatingly kills a fly intentionally, for example,
merely because one does not like its buzzing,  one punishes the criminal
intentionally and does him harm so as to protect ourselves and society. In
the  first  instance  it  is  the  individual who,  to  preserve  himself or  even
merely to avoid displeasure,  intentionally  does harm; in the second it is
the  state.  All morality allows the  intentional  causing of harm in the case
of self-defence:  that is,  when it is  a  matter of self-preservation.  But these
two  points  of  view  suffice  to  explain  all  evil  acts  perpetrated  by  men
against men:  one desires pleasure or to ward off displeasure;  it is always
in some sense a matter of self-preservation. Socrates and Plato are right:
whatever man does he  always does the  good,  that is to say:  that which
seems to him good (useful) according to the relative degree of his intellect, the measure of his rationality.
The innocent element in wickedness. - Wickedness does not have the suffering  of  another  as  such  as  its  objective,  but  our  own  enjoyment,  for example  the  enjoyment  of  the  feeling  of revenge  or  of  a  powerful  excitation of the nerves.  Even teasing demonstrates what pleasure it gives to vent  our  power  on  others  and  to  produce  in ourselves  the  pleasurable
feeling of ascendancy.  Is the immoral element, then, the deriving of pleasure
from  the displeasure of others? Is  Schadenfreude*  devilish,  as Schopenhauer
says it is? Well,  in the midst of nature we procure pleasure for ourselves
by breaking off branches,  loosening stones,  fighting with wild animals,
and do so in order to  become aware of our strength.  Is  it the knowledge
that another suffers because of us that is  here  supposed to make immoral
the same thing in respect of which we otherwise feel unaccountable? But
if one did not know this, one would also experience no pleasure in one's
superiority, which can reveal  itself only in the suffering of the other, for
example  in  the  case  of  teasing.  Pleasure  in  oneself  is  neither  good  nor
bad; whence is the stipulation supposed to come that one may not excite
displeasure in others in order to have pleasure in oneself? Only from the
point of view of utility, that is to say with regard to the consequences, to the
displeasure that may eventuate if the person  harmed,  or in his place the
state, should demand requital and revenge:  originally only this can have
offered a reason for denying oneself such acts.  - Pity has the pleasure of
the  other as its objective just  as little as wickedness has the pain of the
other as  such.  For  it conceals  within  itself at least  two  (perhaps  many
•  Schadenfreude: pleasure in another's suffering
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
more)  elements  of  a  personal  pleasure  and  is  to  that  extent  selfenjoyment:  first as  the  pleasure  of the  emotion,  which  is  the  kind  represented by pity in tragedy, and then, when it eventuates in action, as the pleasure of gratification in the exercise  of power.  If,  in addition to  this,  a
suffering person is very close to us, we remove from ourselves the suffering we ourselves feel by performing an act of pity. - With the exception of a few philosophers,  men have always placed pity fairly low in the order
of rank of the moral sensations:  and rightly.
Self-defence. - If one is to allow that self-defence is morally justified, then
one  must  also  allow  that  almost  all  expressions  of  so-called  immoral
egoism are morally justified:  one causes suffering,  robs or kills,  in order
to preserve or protect oneself,  to ward off personal harm; one lies when
cunning and  dissimulation  is  the proper  means  of self-preservation.  To
harm intentionally when it is a question of our existence or security (preservation of our wellbeing)  is conceded as being morally justified; the state itself does harm from this point of view when it imposes punishments. In
unintentional  harm  there  can,  of course,  be  nothing  immoral,  for here
chance rules. Is  there  then a species of intentional harm where our existence,  the preservation of our wellbeing, are not in question? Is there such a  thing  as  doing  harm  out  of  pure  wickedness,  for example  in  an  act  of
cruelty? When one does not know how much pain an act causes, it is not
an act of wickedness; thus a child is not wicked,  not evil,  with regard to
an animal: it investigates and destroys it as though it were a toy.  But does
one  ever  fully know how  much  pain an act causes another? As far as our
nervous system extends we guard  ourselves against  pain:  if it extended
further, namely into our fellow men, we would never do harm to another
(except in such cases as when we do it to ourselves, that is to say when we
cut ourselves for the purpose of a cure, exert and weary ourselves for the
sake of our health).  We conclude by analogy that something causes someone  pain,  and  through  recollection and  strength of imagination we can ourselves  suffer as a consequence.  But what a difference there nonetheless  remains  between a toothache and the ache  (pity)  that the sight of a toothache  evokes.  Thus:  in  the  case  of  doing  harm  out  of  so-called
wickedness the degree of pain  produced  is in any event unknown to  us;
insofar,  however,  as the act is accompanied  by pleasure (feeling of one's
own power,  of one's  own strong excitation),  it occurs for the purpose of
preserving the wellbeing of the individual, and thus comes under a similar heading to self-defence and lying under duress.  Without pleasure no life;  the  struggle  for  pleasure  is  the  struggle  for  life.  Whether  an  individual pursues this struggle in such a way that people call him good, or in such a way that they call him evil, is determined by the degree and quality
of his intellect.
Justice that rewards. - He who has fully grasped the theory of total unaccountability  can  no longer  accommodate  so-called  justice  that punishes
ON  T H E   H I STORY  OF  T H E   M O R A L   S E N S A T I O N S
and rewards under the concept of justice at all:  provided, that is, that this
consists in giving to each what is his own. For he who is punished does
not deserve  the punishment:  he is merely being employed as the means
of henceforth  deterring others from certain actions;  likewise,  he who is
rewarded  does  not  deserve  this  reward:  for  he  could  not  have  acted
otherwise  than he did.  Thus  the  reward  possesses only the  sense  of  an
encouragement,  to him and others, and the provision of a motive for subsequent actions; commendation is called  out to the runner who is still on the track,  not to him who has reached the finishing-line. Neither punishment nor reward are something due to a person as his; they are given him for reasons of utility without his being able to lay any just claim to them.
One thus has to say: 'the wise man does not reward because a good deed
has  been done',  just  as  one  has  already  said:  'the wise  man  does  not
punish  because a bad deed  has been done but so that bad deeds shall not
be  done' .  If  punishment  and  reward  were  abolished,  the  strongest
motives  for  performi ng  certain  acts  and  not  performing  certain  acts
would  also  be  abolished;  mankind' s  utility  requires  their  continuance;
and insofar as  punishment  and  reward,  blame and  praise,  operate most
effectively upon vanity,  this same utility also requires the continuance of
vanity.
By the waterfall. - At the sight of a waterfall we think we see in the countless curvings,  twistings  and  breakings  of  the waves capriciousness and freedom  of will;  but everything  here is necessary,  every motion  mathematically calculable.  So it is too in the case of human actions; if one were all-knowing,  one would  be able to calculate every individual action,  likewise  every  advance in  knowledge,  every  error,  every  piece  of  wickedness. The actor himself,  to be sure, is fixed in the illusion of free will; if for one moment the wheel of the world were to stand still, and there were an
all-knowing,  calculati ng  intelligence  there  to  make  use of  this  pause,  it
could  narrate  the  future of every  creature  to the remotest  ages and  describe every track along which  this wheel had yet to roll. The actor' s deception regarding himself,  the assumption of free-will,  is itself part of the mechanism it would have to compute.
Unaccountability and innocence. - The complete unaccountability of man for
his actions and  his nature is  the bitterest draught the man of knowledge
has to swallow if he has been accustomed to seeing in accountability and
duty  the  patent  of his  humanity.  All his  evaluations,  all  his  feelings  of
respect and  antipathy have  thereby become disvalued and false:  his  profoundest sentiment,  which  he  accorded  to the sufferer,  the hero,  rested upon an error; he may no longer praise,  no longer censure, for it is absurd
to praise and censure nature and necessity.  As he loves a fine work of art
but does not praise it since it can do nothing for itself, as he stands before
the  plants,  so  must  he  stand  before  the  actions  of  men  and  before  his
own. He can admire their strength,  beauty,  fullness,  but he may not find
H U M A N ,   A L L   TOO  H U M A N
any merit in them: the chemical process and the strife of the elements, the
torment of the sick man who yearns for an end to his sickness, are as little
merits as are those  states of distress and psychic convulsions which arise
when  we are torn back and  forth by conflicting motives until we finally
choose the most powerful of them - as we put it (in  truth,  however, until
the  most  powerful  motive chooses  us).  But all these motives,  whatever
exalted names we may give them, have grown up out of the same roots as
those we believe evilly poisoned; between good and evil actions there is
no difference in  kind,  but  at the  most one  of degree.  Good  actions are
sublimated evil ones;  evil actions are coarsened, brutalized good ones.  It
is the individual's sole desire for self-enjoyment (together with the fear of
losing it) which gratifies itself in every instance,  let a man act as he can,
that is to say as he must:  whether his deeds be those of vanity,  revenge,
pleasure, utility, malice, cunning, or those of sacrifice,  sympathy,  knowledge.  Degrees of intelligent judgement decide  whither  each person will Jet his desire  draw  him;  every  society,  every individual always has present an order of rank of things  considered  good,  according  to  which  he determines his own actions and judges those of others.  But this standard
is continually changing, many actions are called evil but are only stupid,
because the degree of intelligence which decided for them was very low.
Indeed,  in a  certain  sense all present actions  are stupid,  for the highest
degree of human intelligence which can now be attained will certainly be
exceeded in the future: and then all our actions and judgements will seem
in retrospect as circumscribed  and  precipitate  as  the  actions and judgements of still  existing primitive peoples now appear to us. To perceive all this  can  be  very  painful,  but  then  comes  a  consolation:  such  pains  are
birth-pangs.  The  butterfly  wants  to get out of its cocoon,  it tears at it,  it
breaks it open:  then it is blinded and confused by the unfamiliar light, the
realm of freedom.  It is in  such  men as are capable of that suffering - how
few they will be! - that the first attempt will be made to see whether mankind  could  transform itself from a moral to a knowing mankind. The sun of a new gospel is casting its first beam on the topmost summits in the soul of
every  individual:  there  the  mists are  gathering  more  thickly  than  ever,
and  the brightest glitter and the gloomiest twilight lie side by side. Everything  is necessity - thus  says  the  new  knowledge;  and  this  knowledge itself is necessity.  Everything is innocence: and knowledge is the path to
insight  into  this innocence.  If pleasure,  egoism,  vanity  are  necessary  for
the production of the moral phenomena and their finest flower, the sense
for truth and justice in knowledge; if error and aberration of the imagination was the only means by which  mankind was able gradually to raise itself  to  this  degree  of  self-enlightenment  and  self-redemption  - who
could  venture  to  denigrate  those  means?  Who  could  be  despondent
when he becomes  aware of the goal to which those paths lead? It is true
that everything in the domain of morality has become and is changeable,
unsteady,  everything is in flux: but everything is also flooding forward, and
towards  one  goal.  Even  if  the  inherited  habit  of erroneous  evaluation,
loving, hating does continue to rule in us, under the influence of increas-
ON  THE  H I STORY  OF  T H E   M O RA L   S E N S A T I O N S
ing knowledge it will grow weaker: a new habit, that of comprehending,
not-loving, not-hating,  surveying is gradually implanting itself in  us on
the  same  soil  and  will  in  thousands  of  years'  time  perhaps  be  strong
enough  to  bestow  on  mankind  the  power  of  bringing  forth  the  wise,
innocent (conscious of innocence) man as regularly as it now brings forth
not  his antithesis  but  necessary  preliminary  the  unwise,  unjust,  guilt
-
-
conscious man.
THE RELIGIOUS
LIFE
to8
The twofold struggle against an ill. - When we are assailed by an ill we can
dispose of it either by  getting  rid of its cause or by changing the effect it
produces on our sensibilities: that is to say by reinterpreting the ill into a
good whose good effects will perhaps be perceptible only later.  Religion
and  art  (and  metaphysical  philosophy  too)  endeavour  to  bring  about a
change  of sensibility,  partly through changing our judgement as to  the
nature of our  experiences  (for example  with  the  aid  of the  proposition:
'whom God loveth he chastiseth'),  partly through awakening the ability
to  take  pleasure  in  pain,  in  emotion  in  general  (from  which  the  art  of
tragedy  takes  its  starting-point).  The  more  a  man  inclines  towards  reinterpretation, the less attention he will give to the cause of the ill and to doing away with it;  the momentary amelioration and narcoticizing,  such
as is normally employed for example  in a case of toothache,  suffices him
in the case of more serious sufferings too.  The more the domination of the
religions  and  all  the  arts  of narcosis declines,  the  stricter  attention men
pay to the actual abolition of the ill: which is,  to be sure, a bad lookout for
the  writers  of  tragedies  - for  there  is  less  and  less  material  for  tragedy,
because the realm of inexorable, implacable  destiny is growing narrower
and  narrower - but  an  even  worse  one  for  the  priests:  for  these  have
hitherto lived on the narcoticizing of human ills.
Sorrow is knowledge. - How one would like to exchange the false assertions
of the  priests  that  there  is a  God  who  desires  that  we  do  good,  is  the
guardian  and  witness  of  every  action,  every  moment,  every  thought,
who loves  us and  in every  misfortune wants only what is best for us -
how one would  like to exchange these for truths that would be as salutary,  pacifying and beneficial as those errors are! Yet such truths do not exist; the most philosophy can do is to set against them other metaphysical  plausibilities  (at  bottom  likewise  untruths).  The  tragedy,  however, lies in the fact that one cannot believe these dogmas of religion and metaphysics if one has in one's heart and head the rigorous methods of acquiring truth,  while on the other hand one has,  through the development of humanity,  grown  so  tender,  sensitive  and  afflicted  one  has  need  of
means  of cure and  comfort of the  most  potent  description;  from  which
there  thus  arises  the  danger  that man  may bleed to death  from  knowledge of truth. This was expressed by Byron in immortal verse: 6o
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   L I F E
Sorrow is  knowledge:  they who know  the most
Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal truth:
The tree of knowledge  is not that of life. •
For such cares there is no better antidote, at least for the worst hours and
eclipses of  the  soul,  than to  conjure  up  the  solemn  frivolity  of Horace,
and with him to say to oneself:
quid aeternis minorem
consiliis animum fatigas?
cur non  sub alta vel platano vel hac
pinu jacentes -t
What is certain, however,  is that any degree of frivolity or melancholy is
better than a romantic return and desertion, an approach to Christianity
in any form: for, given the current state of knowledge, one can no longer
have any association with it without incurably dirtying one's intellectual
conscience and prostituting it before oneself and  others.  Those agonies
may be painful enough: but without agonies one cannot become a leader
and educator of mankind; and woe to him who wants to attempt it but no
longer possesses this clean conscience!
Truth in religion. - In the period of the Enlightenment the significance of
religion was not adequately appreciated,  of that there can be no doubt:
but it is just as certain that in the reaction to the Enlightenment that followed  it  was  appreciated  much  too  highly,  inasmuch  as  the  religions were treated with love,  almost amorously indeed,  and were for example
adjudged to possess a profound, indeed the profoundest possible understanding of the world; science had only to remove their dogmatic dress in order to possess the 'truth' in mythical form. The religions were thus -
such was the assertion of all opponents of the Enlightenment - supposed
to  express sensu allegorico,t  having regard  to  the  understanding  of  the
masses,  that primeval wisdom which was wisdom as such, inasmuch as
all  true  science  of modern times  had always led  us towards it and  not
away from  it:  so that between  the  oldest  sages of mankind  and all  the
most recent there reigned a harmony, indeed an identity of insights, and
a progress in knowledge - assuming one wished to speak of such a thing
- could apply,  not to the  nature of knowledge,  but only to the form in
which  it  was  communicated.  This  whole  conception  of  religion  and
science is erroneous through and  through; and no one would still venture to adhere to it if Schopenhauer' s eloquence had not taken it under its protection: an eloquence that rings loud and clear yet had to wait a generation before  it reached  its audience.  Certainly one  can gain very  much towards  an  understanding  of  Christianity  and  other  religions  from
•  Sorrow is . . .  that of life: from Byron's Manfred,  Act I Scene I
t  quid aeternis . . .  pinu jacentes: why torment your mind, which is unequal to it, with coun-
sel for eternity; why not come and lie under this tall plane tree, or this pine . . .  ? (Horace: Odes
II 11).
t  sensu allegorico: with the sense of an allegorical representation
6t
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
Schopenhauer's religio-moral interpretation of men and the world; but it
is just as certain that he blundered over the value of religion with respect to
knowledge.  In  this he  himself was  an  all  too  docile pupil  of  the  scientific
teachers  of his  time,  who one  and  all  paid  homage  to  romanticism  and
had  renounced  the  spirit of the Enlightenment; born into our own time,
he could not possibly have spoken of the sensus allegoricus of religion; he
would, rather,  have done honour to truth after his usual fashion with the
words: a religion has never yet, either directly or indirectly, either as dogma or as
parable, contained a truth. For every religion was born out of fear and need,
it has crept into existence along paths of aberrations of reason; once, perhaps, when imperilled by science,  it lyingly introduced some philosophical  teaching or other  into its system,  so that later it could be  discovered there:  but this is a  theologian's artifice  from  the  time when a religion is
already doubting itself. It is these artifices of theology - which in Christianity,  as the religion of a scholarly age saturated with philosophy, were, to be sure, already being practised very early - that have led to that superstition of a sensus allegoricus, but it has been even more the habit of philosophers  (and  especially  those  half-creatures  the  poetizing  philosophers and philosophizing artists) of treating all the sensations they discovered
in  themselves as fundamental  qualities  of mankind  in  general and therewith  to  permit  their  own  religious  sensations  too  to  exert  a  significant influence on the  intellectual  structure of their systems.  Because  philosophers  have  frequently  philosophized  within  a religious  tradition,  or at least  under  the  inherited  power  of the  celebrated  'metaphysical  need',
they have achieved hypotheses which have in fact been  very similar to
Jewish or Christian or Indian religious dogmas - similar, that is to say, in
the way children are usually similar to their mothers,  except that in this
case  the fathers were  not  aware  of this fact of motherhood,  a thing that
does no doubt happen - yet have fabled on in innocent astonishment of a
family  resemblance  between  all  religion  and  science.  In  reality  there
exists between religion and true science neither affinity,  nor friendship,
nor  even  enmity:  they  dwell  on  different  stars.  Every  philosophy  that
exhibits a gleaming religious comet-tail in the darkness of its ultimate conclusions thereby  casts  suspicion  on  everything  in it that is presented as science:  all  of  that,  too,  is  presumably  likewise  religion,  even  if  it  is
dressed up as science. - For the rest, even if all the peoples were in agreement  over  certain  religious  matters,  for example the  existence  of a God (which, by the way, is not the case in regard to this particular point),  this
would  in  fact  be  no  more  than  a counter-argument against  the  thing asserted,  for  example  the  existence  of  a  God:  the  consensus gentium  and hominum• in general can fairly be considered only a piece of folly. On the
other  hand,  there  exists  no  consensus  omnium  sapientiumt  whatever  in
regard  to any  single  thing,  with the exception of that of which Goethe's
lines speak:
•  consensus gentium and hominum: unanimous opinion of all mankind
t  consensus omnium sapientium: unanimous opinion of all the wise
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   L I FE
Aile  die  Weisesten aller der Zeiten
Uicheln und winken und stimmen mit ein:
Toricht,  auf Bessrung der Toren zu  harren!
Kinder der Klugheit, o  habet die Narren
Eben  zum Narren auch,  wie  sichs gehort!•
Expressed without metre and rhyme,  and applied to our case: the consensus sapientium is that the consensus gentium is a piece of folly.
1 1 1
Origin of the religious cult. - If we transport ourselves back to the ages in
which the religious life flourished most vigorously we discover a fundamental conviction which we no longer share and on account of which we see the door to the religious life once and for all closed to us: it concerns
nature and our traffic with  nature.  In those ages one as yet knows nothing of natural laws; neither earth nor sky are constrained by any compulsion;  a  season,  sunshine,  rain  can  come  or  they  can  fail  to  come.  Any conception of natural causality is altogether lacking.  When one rows it is
not the rowing which moves the ship: rowing is only a magical ceremony
by  means of which one compels a  demon  to move the ship.  All illness,
death  itself is  the  result  of magical  influences.  Becoming  ill  and  dying
never occur naturally;  the  whole conception of a  'natural occurrence'  is
lacking - it first dawns with the older Greeks, that is to say in a very late
phase  of  mankind,  in  the  conception of  a  moirat enthroned  above  the
gods.  When  someone  shoots  with  the  bow,  there  is  still  an  irrational
hand and force at work in it; if the wells suddenly dry up, one thinks first
of all of subterranean demons and their knavery; it must be the arrow of a
god through whose invisible action a man suddenly sinks down.  In India
(according to Lubbock)t a carpenter is accustomed to make sacrifices  to
his hammer, his axe and his other tools; a Brahman treats the crayon with
which he writes,  a soldier the weapon he employs in the field, a mason
his trowel, a labourer his plough in the same way. The whole of nature is
in the conception of religious men a sum of actions by conscious and volitional beings, a tremendous complex of arbitrarinesses. In regard to everything external to us no conclusion can be  drawn that something will be thus or thus,  must happen thus or thus; it is we who are the more or less
secure and  calculable;  man  is  the rule, nature is  irregularity - this proposition contains the fundamental conviction which  dominates rude,  religiously  productive  primitive  cultures.  We  men  of today  feel  precisely the opposite: the richer a man feels within himself, the more polyphonic
his subjectivity is, the more powerfully is he impressed by the uniformity
of nature; with Goethe, we all recognize in nature the great means of composure for the modern soul, we listen to the beat of the pendulum of this mightiest of clocks with a longing for rest, for becoming settled and still,
as though we could imbibe this uniformity into ourselves and thereby at
•  'All the wisest of every age are in agreement: it is foolish to wait for fools to be cured of
their folly! The proper thing to do is to make fools of the fools!' From Goethe's 'Kophtisches
Lied', lines 3-7.
t  moira: fate
i Sir John  Lubbock (1834-1913), English historian
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
last  come  to  an  enjoyment of ourselves.  Formerly  the  reverse  was  the
case: if we  think  back  to  rude,  primitive conditions of peoples,  or if we
look  closely  at  present-day  savages,  we  find  them  determined  in  the
strongest  way  by  the  law,  by  tradition:  the  individual  is  tied  to  them
almost automatically and  moved  with the  regularity  of a pendulum.  To
him,  nature  - uncomprehended,  dreadful,  mysterious  nature  - must
seem  the  domain  of freedom,  of caprice,  of a higher power,  indeed,  as it
were a superhuman stage of existence,  a god.  But every individual living
in such ages and conditions feels how his existence, his happiness, that of
the family and the state, the success of any undertaking depends on these
arbitrarinesses  of nature:  certain  natural events  must  occur at the  right
time,  others  fail to occur.  How  can one exercise  an influence over these
terrible  unknown  powers,  how  can  one  fetter  the  domain  of  freedom?
thus he asked  himself,  thus he anxiously  seeks:  are there then no means
of regulating  these  powers  through a  tradition  and  law in  just  the way
you are regulated by  them? - The believer in magic and miracles re�ects
on how to impose a law on nature - :  and,  in brief,  the religious cult is the
outcome of this reflection. The problem these men pose themselves is intimately  related  to  this  one:  how can  the weaker tribe  nonetheless  dictate laws  to the stronger, dispose of it,  regulate its actions (so far as they affect
the weaker)? One  will  think  first of that  mildest kind of constraint,  that
constraint one exercises when one has gained the affection of someone.  It
is  thus  also  possible  to  exercise  a  constraint  on  the  powers ·of  nature
through prayers  and pleadings,  through submission,  through engaging
regularly to give presents and offerings,  through flattering glorifications,
inasmuch  as  by  doing  so  one  obtains  their affection:  love  binds  and  is
bound.  Then one can conclude treaties under which both parties commit
themselves to a certain course of conduct, pledge securities and exchange
oaths.  But  much  more  important  than  this  is  a  species  of more violent
constraint through magic and sorcery. Just as man is able with the aid of
the sorcerer to harm an enemy stronger than himself, just as the sorcery
of  love  can  operate  at  a  distance,  so  the  weaker  man  believes  he  can
influence the mightier spirits of nature too. The chief means employed by
all  sorcery  is  that  of  getting  into  one's  power  something  belonging  to
another: hair, nail, food from his table, even his picture or his name. Thus
equipped  one  can  then  practise  sorcery;  for the  basic  presupposition is
that to everything spiritual there pertains something corporeal; with its
aid one is able to bind,  harm,  destroy the spirit;  the corporeal provides
the handle with which one can grasp the spiritual.  So that, as man thus
influences other men,  so he also  influences some spirit of nature; for the
latter too  has  its  corporeal aspect by  which  it can be  grasped.  The  tree
and, compared with it,  the seed from which it originated - this enigmatic
juxtaposition seems  to demonstrate that one and the same spirit has incorporated itself in both forms, one small,  one big. A stone that suddenly rolls away is the body in which a spirit is active; if a rock lies on a lonely
heath and it seems impossible that human strength could ever have sufficed to take it there,  it must have moved there itself,  that is to say it must
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   L I F E
harbour a spirit.  Everything that has a body is accessible to sorcery,  thus
the spirits of nature are so too.  If a god is actually tied to his image then
one can also exercise quite direct constraint upon him (through denial of
sacrificial food, scourging, flattering and the like). To force from their god
the  goodwill  he  is  denying  them,  the  common  people  in  China  wind
ropes  around  his  image,  pull  it  down,  and  drag  it  along  the  streets
through the mud and dung; 'you dog of a spirit', they say, 'we let you live
in a  splendid  temple,  we  covered  you  with  gold,  we  fed  you  well,  we
sacrificed to you, and yet you are so ungrateful'.  Similar violent measures
have  been  taken  against images  of saints  and  of the  Virgin  in  Catholic
lands  even  in  the  present  century  when  they  have  refused  to  do  their
duty in times of pestilence or drought.
All these magical relationships with nature called countless ceremonies
into existence: and finally, when their confusion had grown too great, an
effort was made to order and systematize them;  so that one came to believe  that  the  favourable  progress  of  the  whole  course  of nature,  and especially of the great succession of the seasons of the year, was guaranteed by a corresponding progress of a system of procedures. The meaning  of  the  religious  cult  is  to  determine  and  constrain  nature  for  the benefit of mankind,  that is to  say to impress upon it a regularity and rule of
law which it does  not at first possess;  while in the present age one seeks to
understand the laws of nature  so as to accommodate oneself to  them.  In
brief,  the religious cult  rests on the ideas of sorcery as between man and
man; and the sorcerer is older than the priest. But it likewise rests on other
and nobler ideas; it presupposes relations of sympathy between man and
man,  the  existence  of  goodwill,  gratitude,  the  hearing  of  petitions,
treaties between enemies,  the bestowal of pledges,  the claim to  protection of property.  Even at very low stages of culture man does not stand towards nature as its impotent slave, he is not necessarily its will-less servant: at the stage of religion attained by the Greeks,  especially in relation to the gods of Olympus, it is even as though two castes lived side by side,
a  nobler  and  mightier  and  one  less  noble;  but  both  somehow  belong
together in their origins and are of one species,  they have no need to be
ashamed of one another.  That is the element of nobility in Greek religiosity.
On viewing certain antique sacrificial  implements.  - How  many  sensations
have been lost us can be seen,  for example,  in the union of the farcical,
even the obscene, with the religious feeling: our sense of the possibility of
this combination dwindles,  we  comprehend  that it existed only historically,  in the festivals of Demeter and  Dionysus,  in  the Christian  Easter and mystery plays: but we too still know the sublime in concert with the
burlesque and the like,  the moving blended with the ludicrous: which a
later age will in turn perhaps no longer comprehend.
Christianity and antiquity. - When on a Sunday morning we hear the bells
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
ringing we ask ourselves: is it possible! this is going on because of a Jew
crucified  2000  years ago who said  he was  the son of God.  The proof of
such an assertion is lacking. - In the context of our age the Christian religion  is certainly a piece of antiquity  intruding out of distant ages past, and that the above-mentioned assertion is believed - while one is otherwise  so  rigorous  in  the  testing  of  claims - is  perhaps  the  most ancient piece of this inheritance. A god who begets children on a mortal woman;
a  sage who  calls  upon  us no  longer  to  work,  no  longer  to  sit in judgement,  but to heed the  signs of the  imminent end of the world; a justice which  accepts  an innocent  man  as a  substitute  sacrifice;  someone who
bids his  disciples  drink his blood;  prayers for miraculous interventions;
sin  perpetrated  against  a  god  atoned  for by  a  god;  fear  of a  Beyond  to
which death is the gateway; the figure of the Cross as a symbol in an age
which no longer knows the meaning and shame of the Cross - how gruesomely  all this  is wafted  to  us,  as if out  of the grave of a  primeval  past!
Can one believe that things of this sort are still believed in?
1 1 4
The un-Hellenic in Christianity. - The Greeks did not see the Homeric gods
as  set above them as masters, or themselves set beneath the gods as servants, as the Jews did. They saw as it were only the reflection of the most successful exemplars of their own caste, that is to say an ideal, not an antithesis of their own nature.  They felt inter-related with them, there existed a mutual interest,  a kind of symmetry. Man thinks of himself as noble when  he  bestows  upon  himself  such  gods,  and  places  himself in  a  relationship to  them  such  as exists between the  lower  aristocracy  and the higher;  while  the Italic peoples have a real peasant religion,  with continual  anxiety  over  evil  and  capricious  powers  and  tormenting  spirits.
Where the Olympian gods failed to dominate,  Greek life too was gloomier  and  more  filled  with  anxiety.  - Christianity,  on  the  other  hand, crushed  and  shattered  man  completely  and  buried  him  as  though  in
mud: into a feeling of total  depravity it then  suddenly  shone a beam of
divine mercy,  so that,  surprised and stupefied by  this act of grace, man
gave vent to a cry of rapture and for a moment believed he bore all heaven
within  him.  It is upon this pathological excess of feeling,  upon the profound corruption of head and heart that was required for it,  that all the psychological  sensations  of  Christianity  operate:  it  desires  to  destroy,
shatter,  stupefy,  intoxicate,  the  one  thing  it  does  not desire  is  measure:
and that is why it is in the profoundest sense barbaric,  Asiatic,  ignoble,
un-Hellenic.
1 1 5
Advantage of  being religious. - There  are sober and industrious people  to
whom religion adheres like a bordering of higher humanity: such people
do  well  to  remain  religious,  it beautifies  them.  - All  men  incapable  of
wielding  some  kind  of weapon  or  other - mouth  and  pen included as
weapons - become servile:  for these Christianity is very useful, for within
Christianity  servility  assumes  the  appearance  of  a  virtue  and  is  quite
THE  R E L I G I O U S   L I F E
astonishingly beautified.  - People whose daily  life appears to them  too
empty and monotonous easily become  religious:  this is  understandable
and  forgivable;  only  they  have  no  right  to  demand  religiosity  of  those
whose daily life is not empty and monotonous.
The everyday Christian. - If the Christian dogmas of a revengeful God,  universal sinfulness,  election by divine grace and the danger of everlasting damnation were true, it would be a sign of weakmindedness and lack of
character not to become a priest, apostle or hermit and, in fear and trembling, to work solely on one's own salvation; it would be senseless to lose sight of one's eternal advantage for the  sake of temporal comfort.  If we
may assume that these things are at any rate believed true, then the everyday Christian cuts a miserable figure; he is a man who really cannot count to three, and who precisely on account of his spiritual imbecility does not
deserve  to  be  punished  so  harshly  as  Christianity  promises  to  punish
him.
Of the prudence of Christianity. - Among the artifices of Christianity is that
of proclaiming  the  complete  unworthiness,  sinfulness  and  despicableness  of  man  in  general  so  loudly  that  to  despise  one's  fellow  man becomes impossible.  'Let him sin as he may, he is nonetheless not essentially different  from me:  it is  I  who  am  in every degree unworthy and despicable':  thus says the Christian to  himself.  But this  feeling too has
lost its sharpest sting, because the Christian does not believe in his individual despicableness: he is evil as a man as such and quietens his mind a little with the proposition: we are all of one kind.
Change  of  cast.  - As  soon  as  a  religion  comes  to dominate  it has as  its
opponents all those who would have been its first disciples.
Destiny  of  Christianity.  - Christianity  came  into  existence  in  order  to
lighten the heart; but now it has first to burden the heart so as afterwards
to be able to lighten it.  Consequently it will perish.
Proof by pleasure.  - The  pleasant opinion  is  taken  to be  true:  this  is the
proof by pleasure (or, as the church puts it, the proof by power) of which
all religions are  so proud,  though they ought to be ashamed of it. If the
belief did not make blessed it would not be believed: how little, then, will
it be worth!
Dangerous game. - Anyone who now again makes room for religious sensibility  within  himself will  then  have  to allow it to grow: he  cannot do otherwise.  As  a  consequence  his  nature  will  gradually  change,  it will
come  to  prefer  that  which  adheres  to  and  dwells  beside  the  religious
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
element, the entire horizon of his judgement and sensibility will be clouded round and religious shadows will flit across it. Sensibility cannot stand still;  therefore let us take care.
Blind pupils. - As long as a man knows very well the strength and weakness of his teaching,  his art, his religion,  its power is still slight. The pupil and apostle who,  blinded by the authority of the master and by the piety
he feels towards him, pays no attention to the weaknesses of a teaching, a
religion,  and  so  on,  usually  has  for  that  reason  more  power  than  the
master. The influence of a  man  and  his work has never yet grown great
without  his blind  pupils.  To  help  a  perception  to  achieve  victory  often
means  merely  to unite  it  with  stupidity so intimately that the weight of
the latter also enforces the victory of the former.
Demolition of the churches.  There is not enough of religion in the world
-
even to  destroy the religions.
Sinlessness of man. - When one has grasped how 'sin came into the world',
namely  through  errors  of reason  by  virtue  of  which  men  mistake one
another  - indeed,  the  individual  man  mistakes  himself - to  be  much
blacker and more evil than is actually the case, then all one's feelings are
very much relieved and lightened, and man and world sometimes appear
in  a  halo  of  harmlessness  the  sight  of which  fills  one  with  a  thorough
sense of wellbeing. In the midst of nature man is always the child in itself.
This child does once dream a dismal, fear-inspiring dream it is true,  but
when it opens its eyes it sees it is still in Paradise.
Irreligiosity of artists. - Homer is so much at home among his gods, and as
a poet takes such  pleasure  in  them,  that he  at any rate  must have been
profoundly  unreligious;  with  that  with  which  popular  belief presented
him - a paltry, crude, in part horrible superstition - he trafficked as freely
as a sculptor with  his clay,  that  is to  say with  the same ease and impartiality  as  that  possessed  by  Aeschylus  and  Aristophanes  and  which  in more recent times distinguishes the great artists of the Renaissance, as it
does Shakespeare and Goethe.
Art  and force  of  false  interpretation.  - All  the  visions,  terrors,  states  of
exhaustion and rapture experienced by the saint are familiar pathological
conditions  which,  on  the  basis  of  rooted  religious  and  psychological
errors,  he only interprets quite differently,  that is to say not as illnesses.
Thus the daemon of Socrates too was perhaps an ear-infection which, in
accordance with the moralizing manner of thinking that dominated him,
he only interpreted differently from how it would be interpreted now. It is
not otherwise with the madness and ravings of the prophets and oracular
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   L I F E
priests; it is always the degree of knowledge, imagination, exertion, morality  in  the  head  and  heart of the  interpreters  that has  made so much  of them. For those men called geniuses and saints to produce their greatest
effect they have to have constrained to their side interpreters who for the
good of mankind misunderstand them.
Reverence for madness. - Because it was noticed that a state of excitement
often made the head clearer and called up happy inspirations, it was believed that through the extremest states of excitement one would participate in the happiest of inspirations: and thus the mad were revered as the wise and propounders of oracles.  What lies at the bottom of this is a false
conclusion.
What science promises.  Modern  science  has  as  its  goal:  as  little  pain  as
-
possible,  as long  life  as possible - thus a  kind  of eternal  bliss,  though  a
very modest kind in comparison with the promises of the religions.
Forbidden  generosity.
There  is  not  enough  love  and  goodness  in  the
-
world for us to be  permitted  to give any of it away to imaginary things.
Continuance of the  religious  cult  in  the heart.  - The  Catholic  Church,  and
before it all the cults of antiquity,  had command  of the whole domain of
the means by which man is transported into unfamiliar states and robbed
of the  ability  to calculate  coolly  or to  think  clearly.  A  church  trembling
with  deep  sounds;  dull,  regular,  repressed  calls  from  a  company  of
priests who involuntarily  transmit  their tension  to the congregation and
excite  them  to  listen  almost  in fear,  as  though  a  miracle  were about  to
occur; the breath of the architecture,  which,  as the abode of a divinity,
reaches up into obscurity, in the dark spaces of which the divinity may at
any moment make evident his dreaded presence - who would want mankind  to  experience  such  things  again,  now  that  the  presuppositions behind them are no longer believed in? But the consequences of all this
are  nonetheless  still  present:  the  inner  world  of the  sublime,  affected,
tremulous,  contrite,  expectant  states  was  born  in  man  principally
through the religious cult; that of it which still remains in the soul was, in
the days of its germination and growth, tended and cultivated by it.
Religious after-pains.  - However much one may believe one has  weaned
oneself from  religion,  the  weaning  has  not  been  so  complete  that  one
does  not  enjoy  encountering  religious  moods  and  sentiments  without
conceptual  content,  for  example  in  music;  and  when  a  philosophy
demonstrates to us the justification of metaphysical hopes and the profound peace of soul to be attained through them, and speaks for example of 'the whole sure evangel in the glance of Raphael's Madonna', we go
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
out to meet such  assertions  and  expositions  with  particular warmth  of
feeling; the philosopher here has an easier task of demonstration, for he
here encounters a heart eager to take what he has to offer. From this it is
apparent that the less thoughtful free spirits are really taking exception
only to the dogmas, but are very well acquainted with the magic of the religious  sensations;  it  hurts  them  to  let  the  latter  go  on  account  of  the former. - Scientific philosophy  has to be very much on its guard against
smuggling in errors on the basis of this need (a need  that has come into
existence and consequently also a transient one): even logicians speak of
'presentiments' of truth  in morality and art (for example of the presentiment  'that the essence of things is one'): which is something that should be  forbidden  them.  Between  truths  that  are  the  outcome  of  cautious
reasoning and these products of 'presentiment' there lies the unbridgable
gulf  created  by  the  fact  that we owe  the  former to  the  intellect  and  the
latter  to  a  need.  Hunger is  no  proof  that  the  food  that  would  satisfy  it
exists,  though  it  desires  the  food.  'Presentiment'  does  not  signify  any
degree of knowledge of the existence of a thing,  it signifies regarding it as
possible,  inasmuch  as  one  desires  or  fears  it:  'presentiment'  does  not
advance  a  single  step  into  the land of certainty. - One  involuntarily  believes  that  the  religiously  coloured  departments  of  a  philosophy  are better established  than  the others;  but  at bottom  the  case  is the reverse;
one only has the inner desire it may be so - that is to say, that what makes
happy should  also be what is  true.  This desire  misleads  us into purchasing bad reasons for good ones.
1 )2
On the Christian need of redemption. - Careful reflection ought to be able to
yield  an  explanation  of  the  occurrence  in  the  soul  of a  Christian  called
need  of redemption  which  is free  of mythology:  that  is  to  say,  a purely
psychological explanation.  It is true that psychological explanation of religious  states  and  occurrences  has  hitherto  stood in  a  certain  ill-repute, insofar as a theology calling itself free has been pursuing its unprofitable
business in this domain: for its purpose was from the first, as the spirit of
its founder, Schleiermacher, * leads us to suppose, the preservation of the
Christian  religion  and  the  continuance  of Christian  theology;  in  which
regard  psychological  analysis  of the  'facts'  of  religion  was  supposed  to
afford a  new anchorage and  above  all a new occupation.  Undeterred by
these  events we venture to offer the following interpretation of the  said
phenomenon.  - Man  is conscious of certain  actions which  stand  low  in
the customary order of rank of actions; indeed,  he discovers in himself a
tendency to actions of this sort which seems to him almost as immutable
as  his  whole  nature.  How  much  he  would  like  to  attempt  that  other
species  of  actions  which  in  the  general  estimation  are  accounted  the
highest,  how  much he would like  to feel  full  of that  good  consciousness
which is  supposed  to  attend  a  selfless  mode  of thought!  Unhappily he
• Schleiermacher:  Friedrich Schleiermacher (t76S-t834),  the leading Protestant theologian
of his age
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   L I FE
gets  no  further  than  desiring  this:  his discontent at his  insufficiency  is
added to all the other kinds of discontent which his lot in life in general or
the consequences of those other actions called wicked have engendered
in him; so that there arises a profound depression of spirits, together with
a  watching-out for a physician who  might be able to alleviate this condition and all its causes.  - This condition would not be felt so bitterly if man compared himself only with other men: for then he would have no
reason to be especially discontented with himself, since he would see he
was only bearing the general burden of human dissatisfaction and imperfection.  But he compares himself with a being which alone is capable of those actions called unegoistic and lives continually in the consciousness
of a selfless mode of thought,  with God;  it is because he looks into this
brilliant mirror that his own nature  seems  to  him so dismal,  so  uncommonly distorted. Then again,  the thought of this same being makes him fearful insofar as it appears to his imagination as chastising justice: in all
possible experiences, great and small, he believes he recognizes its anger
and menaces, indeed that he feels already in advance the whiplash of this
judge and executioner.  Who can help him in this peril,  which,  inasmuch
as the term of punishment is to be unending, exceeds in horror anything
else he can imagine?
1}3
Before we go on to exhibit this condition in its further consequences let us
confess  to  ourselves  that  the  man  in  this  condition  has  got  into  it,  not
through his 'guilt' and 'sin', but through a succession of errors of reason,
that it was the fault of the mirror if his nature appeared to him dark and
hateful to such a degree, and that this mirror was his work,  the very imperfect  work  of  human  imagination  and  judgement.  Firstly,  a  being capable of nothing but unegoistic actions is more fabulous than the phoenix; it cannot even be imagined clearly, if only because under strict examination  the whole concept  'unegoistic action'  vanishes into  thin air.  No man has ever done anything that was done wholly for others and with no
personal motivation whatever; how,  indeed,  should a man be able to do
something that had no reference to himself, that is to say lacked all inner
compulsion (which would have its basis in a personal need)? How could
the ego act without the ego? - On the other hand,  a God who was wholly
love,  as is occasionally supposed, would be incapable of a  single  unegoistic action: in connection with which one should recall a thought of Lichtenberg's,  though  it  was,  to  be  sure,  taken  from  a  somewhat  lower sphere: 'It is impossible,  as is commonly said, for us to feel for others; we
feel only for ourselves. The proposition sounds hard, but is not if it is correctly  understood.  One  loves  neither  father,  nor mother,  nor wife,  nor child,  one  loves  the  pleasant  sensations  they  produce  in  us',  or  as  La
Rochefoucauld says:  'si on croit aimer sa maitresse pour /'amour d'elle, on est
bien trompe' . • As to why actions performed out of love are evaluated more
highly than others,  namely not on account of their nature but on account
•  'if we  believe  we love our mistress for love of her we are very  much mistaken'
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
of their  utility,  one  should consult  the  investigations  'On  the Origin  of
the Moral Sensations' previously referred to. If, however, a man should
wish  to be,  like that God,  wholly  love,  and to do and desire everything
for  others  and  nothing  for  himself,  then  the latter is  impossible  simply
'because he has to do a great deal for  himself if he is to be able to do anything  whatever  for  the  sake  of others.  Moreover,  such  a  thing  presupposes  that  the  other  is  sufficiently  egoistical  to accept  this  sacrifice,  this life lived for his  sake,  over and over again:  so that men of love and selfsacrifice would have to have an interest in the continuance of the loveless egoist incapable of self-sacrifice, and the highest morality would, if it was
to continue to exist, have to downright compel the existence of immorality
(whereby it would,  to be sure,  abolish itself). - Further: the idea of a God
is disturbing and humiliating as long as it is believed, but how it originated
can  at  the  present  stage  of  comparative  ethnology  no  longer  admit  of
doubt; and with the insight into this origination that belief falls away. The
Christian who compares his nature with  that of God is like Don Quixote,
who under-estimated  his own courage because his head was filled with
the miraculous deeds of the heroes of chivalric romances: the standard of
comparison applied in both cases belongs in  the domain of fable.  But if
the idea of God falls away,  so does the feeling of 'sin' as a transgression
against  divine  precepts,  as  a blemish on a creature consecrated to God.
Then there probably still remains over that feeling of depression which is
very  much  entwined  with and related  to  fear of punishment by  secular
justice or the disapprobation of other men;  the depression caused by the
pang of conscience,  the sharpest sting in the feeling of guilt,  is nonetheless  abolished  when  one  sees  that,  although  one  may by  one's  actions have  offended  against  human  tradition,  human  laws  and  ordinances,
one has not therewith  endangered the  'eternal salvation of the soul' and
its relationship  to  the  divinity.  If a  man  is,  finally,  able  to  attain to  the
"philosophical conviction of the unconditional necessity of all actions and
their  complete  unaccountability  and  to  make  it  part  of  his  flesh  and
blood,  then that remainder of the pang of conscience also disappears.
1 34
Now  if,  as  has  been  said,  the  Christian  has  got into the  feeling  of self-
contempt through  certain errors,  that is to say through a false,  unscientific interpretation of his actions and  sensations,  he also notices with the highest astonishment  that  this  condition  of  contempt,  the  pang of conscience,  displeasure  in  general,  does  not  persist,  but  that  occasionally there are hours when all this is wafted  away from his soul and he again
feels free and valiant.  What has happened is that his pleasure in himself,
his contentment at his own strength,  has, in concert with the weakening
which  every  profound  excitation  must  necessarily  undergo,  carried  off
the victory: he loves himself again, he feels it - but precisely this love, this
new  self-valuation  seems  to  him  incredible,  he  can  see  in  it  only  the
wholly undeserved flowing down of a radiance of mercy from on high. If
he  earlier  believed  he  saw  in  every  event  warnings,  menaces,  punish-
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   L I FE
ments  and  every  sort  of  sign  of divine  wrath,  he  now  interprets  divine
goodness into his experiences: this event appears to him to exhibit kindness, that is like a helpful signpost, a third and especially the whole joyful mood he is in  seems to  him proof that God is merciful. If he earlier in a
condition of depression  interpreted  his actions falsely,  now he does the
same with his experiences;  he  conceives his mood of consolation as the
effect upon him of an external power, the love with which fundamentally
he loves himself appears as divine love; that which he calls mercy and the
prelude to redemption is in truth self-pardon, self-redemption.
Thus: a certain false psychology, a certain kind of fantasy in the interpretation  of  motives  and  experiences  is  the  necessary  presupposition  for becoming a  Christian and  for  feeling  the  need of redemption.  With  the
insight into this aberration of reason and imagination one ceases to be a
Christian.
Of  Christian asceticism and  holiness.  However much  individual  thinkers
-
have exerted  themselves  to represent those strange  phenomena  of morality  usually  called  asceticism  and  holiness  as  a  marvel  and  miracle  to attempt a  rational  explanation of which  is almost a  sacrilege  and  profanation: the urge to commit this sacrilege is, on the other hand, every bit as strong.  A  mighty  drive  of  nature  has  at  all  times  prompted  a  protest
against these phenomena as such; science, insofar as it is, as aforesaid, an
imitation of nature,  permits itself at least to register a protest against the
alleged inexplicability, indeed inapproachability, of the said phenomena.
So far,  to be sure, it has done so in vain: they are still unexplained, a fact
that  gives  great  satisfaction  to  the  above-mentioned  votaries  of  the
morally miraculous. For,  speaking quite generally,  the unexplained is to
be altogether inexplicable,  the  inexplicable  altogether unnatural,  supernatural, miraculous - thus sounds the demand in the souls of all religious people  and  metaphysicians  (in  those  of the  artists,  too,  when  they  are
also thinkers); while the scientific man sees in this demand the 'evil principle'.  - The  first  general  probability  one  arrives  at  when  reflecting  on holiness and asceticism is that its nature is a complex one: for almost everywhere, within the physical world as well as in the moral, the supposedly marvellous has successfully been traced back to the complex, to the multiply caused.  Let us therefore venture first to isolate individual drives in the soul of the  saint and ascetic and  then conclude by thinking of them
entwined together.
There is a defiance of oneself of which many forms of asceticism are among
the most sublimated expressions. For certain men feel so great a need to
exercise their strength and lust for power that, in default of other objects
or because their efforts in other directions have always miscarried, they at
last  hit  upon  the  idea  of  tyrannizing  over  certain  parts  of  their  own
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
nature,  over,  as it  were,  segments or stages of themselves.  Thus  some
thinkers confess  to views which are plainly not calculated to increase or
improve  their  reputation;  some  downright  call  down  the  disrespect  of
others  upon  themselves  when  by  keeping  silent they  could easily  have
remained  respected  men;  others  retract  earlier  opinions  and  are  not
afraid of henceforth being called inconsistent: on the contrary, they strive
to be  called  so,  and  behave  like high-spirited  riders who like their steed
best only when it has grown savage,  is covered with sweat,  and is tamed.
Thus a man climbs on dangerous paths in the highest mountains so as to
mock  at  his  fears  and  trembling  knees;  thus  a  philosopher adheres  to
views of asceticism,  humility  and  holiness in the light of which his own
image becomes  extremely  ugly.  This division of oneself, this mockery of
one's own nature,  this spernere se sperni* of which the religions have made
so much,  is actually a very high degree of vanity.  The entire morality of
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  belongs  here:  man  takes  a  real  delight  in
oppressing  himself with  excessive  claims  and afterwards idolizing  this
tyrannically  demanding  something in his  soul.  In every ascetic morality
man worships a part of himself as God and for that he needs to diabolize
the other  part.  -
1)8
Man  is  not equally  moral  all the time,  that  fact  is  well  known:  if  one
judges his morality according to his capacity for great self-sacrificing resolution and  self-denial  (which,  protracted and grown to a habit,  constitutes  holiness),  then  it  is  in  his  affects  that  he  is  most  moral;  higher excitation presents him with quite novel motivations which, in his more
usual cold  and  sober  state,  he  would  perhaps  not even believe  himself
capable of. How does this come about? Probably through the proximity to
one another of all great and highly exciting things; once a man has been
brought to a state of extraordinary tension,  he can resolve equally well to
take a fearful revenge or to break himself of his thirst for revenge. Under
the influence of violent emotion he desires in any event the great, tremendous, prodigious, and if he happens to notice that the sacrifice of himself satisfies  him as much  as,  or even more than the sacrifice of another,  he
chooses  it.  All he is really concerned  with,  therefore,  is the discharge of
his  emotion;  to  relieve  his  state  of  tension  he  seizes  the  spears  of  his
enemies and buries them in his own breast. That there is something great
in self-denial,  and not only in revenge,  must  have been inculcated into
man only through long habituation; a divinity who sacrifices himself was
the  strongest,  most  effective  symbol  of  this  kind  of greatness.  As  the
overcoming  of the  foe  hardest  to  conquer,  the  sudden  mastering of an
affect - that is how this denial appeared; and to this extent it counted as the
summit of the  moral.  In reality what is involved  is the exchange of one
idea  for  another,  with  the  feelings  remaining  at  the  same  level  of elevation  and  flood.  When they are grown sober again and are resting from this affect, men no longer understand the morality of those moments, but
•  spernere se sperni: answer contempt with contempt
T H E   R E L I G I O U S   LIFE
the general  admiration of all who also experienced  it sustains and  supports them; pride is their consolation when the affect and an understanding of their deed  fades  away.  Thus:  these acts of self-denial also  are  at bottom not moral,  insofar as they are not performed strictly for the sake
of others; the case,  rather,  is that the other only offers the highly tensed
heart an opportunity to relieve itself through this self-denial.
In many respects the ascetic too seeks to make life easier for himself: and
he does so as a rule by complete subordination to the will of another or to
a comprehensive law and ritual; somewhat in the way in which the Brahman decides  nothing  whatever  for  himself but is  guided every moment by holy writ. This subordination is a powerful means of becoming master
of oneself; one is occupied and thus not bored, and yet one's own willfulness and passions are not in any way involved; after one has acted there is no feeling of responsibility and therefore no pangs of remorse. One has
renounced  one's  own  will  once  and  for  all,  and  this  is  easier  than
renouncing it only now and again; just as it is easier to relinquish a desire
altogether than to enjoy it in moderation.  If we recall the relationship between man  and  state  now obtaining,  we discover that there too  unconditional obedience is  more comfortable  than conditional.  The saint thus makes his life easier through this complete surrender of his personality,
and one deceives oneself if one admires in this phenomenon the supreme
heroic feat of morality. It is in any event harder to maintain one's personality without vacillation or  dissimulation  than it is to free oneself of it in the  way  described;  and  it  demands,  moreover,  a  lot  more  spirit  and
reflection.
After  having  discovered  in  many  actions  more  difficult  to  explain  that
pleasure in emotion as such,  I would also recognize in regard to the selfcontempt which is one of the characteristics of saintliness, and likewise in acts of self-torture (through hunger and -flagillation,  dislocation of limbs,
simulation of madness), a means by which these natures combat the general  enervation of their will  to live  (their  nerves):  they employ the most painful stimulants and cruelties so as, at least for a time, to emerge out of
that  boredom and torpor into which  their great  spiritual  indolence and
their subordination to the will of another just described so often plunges
them.
The most usual means the ascetic and saint employs to make his life nonetheless endurable and enjoyable consists in occasionally waging war and in the alternation  of victory  and  defeat.  To  this end  he  requires an  opponent,  and  he  finds  him  in  the  so-called  'enemy  within'.  He  exploits especially his tendency to vanity, to a thirst for honours and domination,
then his sensual desires,  in an attempt to see his life as a continual battle
and himself as a battlefield upon which good and evil spirits wrestle with
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
alternating success. It is well known that sensual fantasy is moderated,
indeed almost suppressed, by regularity in sexual intercourse, while it is
on the other hand unfettered and dissolute when such intercourse is disorderly or does not take place at all. The fantasy of many Christian saints has been dirty to an uncommon degree; by virtue of the theory that these
desires are actually demons raging within them they do not feel any very
great sense of responsibility for this state of things; it is to this feeling that
we owe the instructive candidness of their self-confessions. It has been in
their interest that this struggle should be in progress all the time to some
degree, since, as already said, it provides entertainment for their tedious
life.  But  so  that  this  struggle  should  seem  sufficiently  momentous  to
excite  the  continuing  interest  and  admiration  of the  non-saints,  sensuality had to be more and more stigmatized as heretical, indeed the danger of everlasting damnation was associated so closely with these things that
it is highly probable  that  throughout whole ages  Christians  even begot
children with a bad conscience; whereby a great injury has certainly been
done  to  mankind.  And  yet  here  truth  is  stood  completely  on  its  head:
which  is in  the case  of truth particularly unbecoming.  Christianity  had
indeed  said:  every man  is conceived and born in  sin;  and in  the  insupportable superlative Christianity of Calderon* this idea  was  again knotted  and  wound  together,  so  that  he  ventured  on  the  most  perverse paradox  there is in the well-known lines:
the greatest guilt of man
is  that he was born.
In all pessimistic religions  the  act  of procreation  is  felt as being bad in
itself, but this feeling is by no means common to all mankind and even
the  pessimists  are  not  unanimous  in  the  matter.  Empedocles,t  for
example, knows nothing whatever of the disgraceful, diabolical, sinful in
erotic things; on the contrary,  he  sees  upon the great field of misfortune
only one apparition that promises hope and salvation,  Aphrodite; to him
she is a guarantee  that strife will not rule for ever but will one day hand
over the sceptre to a gentler daemon.  The Christian practical pessimists
had, as aforesaid, an interest in seeing that a different opinion remained
dominant;  they  required for the solitude and  the spiritual  wasteland  of
their life  an enemy  always  on  the  alert:  and  an  enemy,  moreover,  that
was  universally  recognized  through  the  combating  and  overcoming  of
whom they  could repeatedly appear to the non-saints as half incomprehensible,  supernatural beings.  If,  as a  consequence of their mode of life and  the  ruination of their  health,  this  enemy  finally  took  flight  for ever,
they  at  once  knew  how  to  see  their  inner  world  populated  by  new
demons.  The rise and  fall  of the scales called pride  and humility entertained  their  brooding  heads  just as  well  as  did  the  alternation  of desire and  repose of soul. In those days psychology served the end,  not only of
casting  suspicion  on  everything  human,  but  of  oppressing,  scourging
•  Calder6n: Pedro Calder6n de Ia Barca (t6oo-8t): Spanish dramatist
t Empedocles (d.c. 433 BC): 'pre-Socratic' philosopher
THE  R E L I G I O U S   L I F E
and crucifying it; one wanted to believe oneself as bad and evil as possible,
one  sought  fear  for  the  salvation  of  one's  soul,  despair  of  one's  own
strength.  Everything natural to which  one attaches the idea  of the  bad
and  sinful  (as  for  example  is  done  even  now  in  regard  to  the  erotic)
oppresses the imagination and makes it gloomy,  because frightening to
look upon, causes men to haggle with themselves and deprives them of
security and trust; even their dreams acquire a flavour of tormented conscience.  And yet this suffering from the natural in the reality of things is completely  groundless:  it  is  only  the  consequence  of  opinions  about
things.  It is easy to see how  designating  the ineluctably natural as bad,
and then invariably finding it so, makes men themselves worse than they
need be.  The artifice practised by religion and by those metaphysicians
who will have man evil and sinful by nature is to make him suspicious of
nature and thus make him himself bad: this being a consequence of his inability to  divest himself of nature's garb.  If he lives long in this  natural dress he gradually comes to feel weighed down by such a burden of sins
that supernatural powers are needed to lift it; and with that the need for
redemption we have already discussed steps upon the scene, answering
to no actual but only to an imaginary sinfulness.  Go through the moral
demands exhibited in the documents of Christianity one by one and you
will find that in every case they are exaggerated, so that man could not live
up to them;  the  intention  is not that  he  should  become more  moral,  but
that he should feel as sinful as possible. If man had failed to find this feeling
pleasant - why should he have engendered such an idea and adhered to it
for so long? Just as in the world of antiquity an immeasurable quantity of
spirit and  inventiveness  had  been  expended  on augmenting joy in life
through  festive  cults,  so  in  the  era  of  Christianity  an  immeasurable
amount of spirit has likewise been sacrificed to another endeavour:  man
was by every means to be made to feel sinful and thereby become excited,
animated, enlivened in general. To excite, animate, enliven at any price is  that  not  the  watchword  of  an  enervated,  over-ripe,  over-cultivated age? The circle of all natural sensations had been run through a hundred
times,  the  soul  had  grown  tired  of them:  thereupon  the  saint  and  the
ascetic invented a new species of stimulant.  They presented themselves
before all eyes, not really so that many might imitate them, but as a frightful  and yet  delightful  spectacle,  performed  on  that  borderline between world  and  over-world  where  in  those  days  everyone  believed  they
beheld now rays of heavenly light, now uncanny tongues of flame flickering up from the depths.  The eye of the saint, directed upon the dreadful significance of the brevity of earthly life, upon the proximity of the final
decision in regard to endless new vistas of life, this burning eye in a body
half destroyed, made the men of the ancient world tremble in their very
depths; to gaze at him,  suddenly to look away, to feel again the attraction
of the spectacle, to surrender to it, to satiate oneself with it until the soul
was convulsed with fire and icy fevers - this was the last pleasure antiquity
invented  after  it  had  grown  apathetic  even  to  the  sight  of  animal  and
human combats.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
To summarize what has been said: that condition of the soul in which the
saint  or  one  becoming  a  saint  rejoices  is  composed  of  elements  with
which we are all very familiar; except that in the light of other conceptions
than  the  religious  they  appear  in  other  colours  and  then  they  usually
incur the  censure  of  mankind  as  surely as,  garnished with religion and
the  ultimate  meaning  of  existence,  they  can  count  on  admiration  or,
indeed, worship- or at least could count on them in earlier ages. Now the
saint  practises  that  defiance of oneself that  is  a close  relation  of lust  for
power  and  bestows the feeling of  power  even  upon  the hermit; now his
distended sensibility leaps out of the desire to allow his passions free rein
over  into  the  desire  to  break  them  like  wild  horses  under  the  mighty
impress  of  a  proud  soul;  now  he  desires  a  complete  cessation  of  sensations of a disturbing,  tormenting,  stimulating  kind,  a  waking  sleep,  a lasting repose in the womb of a dull, beast- and plant-like indolence; now
he  seeks  conflict  and  ignites it  in himself,  because  boredom  has  shown
him its yawning face: he scourges his self-idolatry with self-contempt and
cruelty,  he rejoices in the wild riot of his desires,  in the sharp sting of sin,
indeed  in  the  idea  that  he  is  lost,  he  knows  how  to  lay  a  trap  for  his
affects, for example that of the extremest lust for power,  so that he passes
over  into  the  extremest  abasement  and  his  hunted  soul  is  wrenched
utterly out of joint by this contrast; and when,  finally,  he comes to thirst
for visions, for colloquies with the dead or divine beings, it is at bottom a
rare kind of voluptuousness he desires, but perhaps that voluptuousness
within  which  all  other  kinds  are  knotted  together.  Novalis,  one  of the
authorities  in  questions  of  saintliness  by  experience  and  instinct,  once
blurted  out the whole  secret with naive rapture:  'It is sufficiently marvellous  that  not  long  ago  the  association  of voluptuousness,  religion  and cruelty called the attention of men to their inner relatedness and common
tendency. '
It is  not  what  the  saint  is,  but  what  he signifies  in  the  eyes of the  nonsaints,  that gives him his world-historic value.  Because he was mistaken for  what he was not,  because his  psychological states were  interpreted
falsely  and  he  was  set  as  far  apart  as  possible  from  everyone  else  as
though he were something altogether incomparable, strange and suprahuman: that is how he acquired the extraordinary power with which he was able  to dominate the  imagination of  whole  nations and whole ages.
He himself did not know himself; he himself deciphered the characters of
his moods,  inclinations and actions by means of an art of interpretation
that was as exaggerated and artificial as the pneuma tical interpretation of
the  Bible.  What  was  perverse  and pathological in  his  nature,  with  its
coupling  together  of  spiritual  poverty,  deficient  knowledge,  ruined
health and over-excited nerves, was concealed from his own sight just as
it was from that of his spectators.  He was not an especially  good man,
even less an especially wise one: but he signified something that exceeded
THE  R E L I G I O U S   L I FE
the ordinary human portion of goodness and wisdom.  Belief in him lent
support to belief in the divine and miraculous,  in a religious  meaning of
existence, in an imminent Day of Judgement.  In the evening glow of the
sun of the coming end of the world that shone over all Christian  peoples
the shadow of the saint grew to monstrous size:  to such a height, indeed,
that even in our own age, which no longer believes in God, there are still
thinkers who believe in the saints.
It goes  without saying that this depiction of the saint,  which is sketched
after the average profile of the whole species, can be countered by many
depictions which might evoke more pleasant feelings.  Individual exceptions stand apart from the species in general, either through great gentleness and philanthropy or through the charm of an uncommon degree of energy;  others  are  in  the  highest  degree  attractive  because  their whole
being is flooded with the light of certain delusions: as for example was the
case with the celebrated founder of Christianity, who regarded himself as
the innate son of God and as a consequence felt himself to be sinless; so
that,  through  this conceit - which ought not  to be judged  too harshly,
since the whole of antiquity swarmed with sons of gods - he attained the
same goal,  the feeling of complete sinlessness,  complete unaccountability,  which  nowadays everyone can acquire  through  scientific  study.  - I have likewise taken no account of the Indian saints, who occupy an intermedite position between the Christian saint and the Greek philosopher and  to  this  extent  do  not  represent  a  pure  type:  knowledge,  science  -
insofar as  there  was  any  - elevation  above  other  men  through  logical
discipline and schooling have been demanded by the Buddhists as a sign
of  sainthood  to  the  same  extent  as  these  qualities  are  rejected  and
denounced as signs of unholiness in the Christian world.
FROM THE SOULS OF
ARTISTS
AND WRITERS
What is perfect is supposed not to have become. - In the case of everything perfect we are accustomed to abstain  from asking how it became:  we rejoice in the present fact as though it came out of the ground by magic.  Here we
are probably still standing under the after-effect of a primeval mythological invention.  We still almost feel (for example in a Greek temple such as th:tt at Paestum) that a god must one morning have playfully constructed
his dwelling out of these tremendous weights: at other times that a stone
suddenly acquired by magic a soul that is now trying to speak out of it.
The artist knows that his work produces its  full effect when it excites  a
belief in an improvisation,  a belief that it came into being with a miraculous  suddenness; and  so he may assist this  illusion  and introduce those elements of rapturous restlessness, of blindly groping disorder,  of attentive reverie that attend the beginning of creation into his art as a means of deceiving the soul of the spectator or auditor into a mood in which he believes  that  the  complete  and  perfect  has  suddenly  emerged  instantaneously. - The science of art has, it goes without saying, most definitely to counter this illusion and to display the bad habits and false conclusions
of the intellect by virtue of which it allows the artist to ensnare it.
The artist's sense of truth. - In regard to knowledge of truths, the artist possesses  a  weaker  morality  than  the  thinker;  he  does  not  wish  to  be deprived  of  the  glittering,  profound  interpretations  of  life  and  guards
against simple  and sober methods and results. He appears to be fighting
on  behalf  of  the  greater  dignity  and  significance  of  man;  in  reality  he
refuses  to  give  up  the presuppositions which  are  most  efficacious  for  his
art, that is to say the fantastic, mythical, uncertain, extreme, the sense for
the symbolical, the over-estimation of the person, the belief in something
miraculous in genius: he thus considers the perpetuation of his mode of
creation more important than scientific devotion to  the true in any form,
however plainly this  may appear.
Art as necromancer. - Among the subsidiary duties of art is that of conserving,  and no doubt also of taking extinguished,  faded ideas and restoring to them a little colour:  when it performs this task it winds a band around
different ages and makes the spirits that inform them return.  It is only a
phantom life that here arises,  to be sure,  such as appears about graves or
like the return  of the beloved dead in  dreams;  but the old emotions are
Bo
FROM  T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I S T S   A N D   WRITERS
again aroused, if only for a few moments, and the heart beats to a rhythm
it had forgotten. On account of this useful function of art one must overlook it in the artist himself if he does not stand in the foremost ranks of the  Enlightenment  and  the  progressive  masculinization  of  man:  he  has
remained a child or a youth all his life, stuck at the point at which he was
first assailed by his drive to artistic production; feelings belonging to the
first stages of life are,  however,  admitted to be closer to those of earlier
times than to those of the present  century.  Without his knowing it,  his
task becomes that of making mankind childlike; this is his glory and his
limitation.
Poets as alleviators of life. - Insofar as they want to alleviate the life of men,
poets either turn their eyes away from the toilsome present or they procure for the present new colours through a light which they direct upon it from the past. To be able to do this,  they themselves have to be in many
respects backward-looking  creatures:  so  that  they  can  be  employed  as
bridges to quite distant ages and conceptions,  to dead or dying religions
and cultures. They are, in fact, always and necessarily epigones. There are,
to be sure, several things to be said against their means of alleviating life:
they  soothe  and  heal  only  provisionally,  only for a  moment;  they even
hinder men from working for a real improvement in their conditions by
suspending and  discharging in a  palliative way the very passion which
impels the discontented to action.
The slow arrow ofbeauty. - The noblest kind of beauty is not that which suddenly transports us, which makes a violent and intoxicating assault upon us  (such  beauty  can  easily  excite  disgust),  but  that  which  slowly  infiltrates  us,  which we bear away with us almost without noticing and encounter  again  in  dreams,  but  which  finally,  after  having  for  long  lain modestly in our heart,  takes total possession of us, filling our eyes with
tears and our heart with longing. - What is it we long for at the sight of
beauty? To  be beautiful ourself:  we imagine we would be very  happy if
we were beautiful. - But that is an error.
Animation of art. - Art raises its head where the religions relax their hold.
It takes over a host of moods and  feelings engendered by religion,  lays
them to its heart and itself grows more profound and soulful,  so that it is
now capable of communicating exultation and enthusiasm as it formerly
could  not.  The wealth of religious feelings,  swollen to a  torrent,  breaks
forth again and again and seeks to conquer new regions: but the growth
of the Enlightenment undermined the dogmas of religion and inspired a
fundamental  distrust  of  them:  so  .that  the  feelings  expelled  from  the
sphere of religion by the Enlightenment throw themselves into art; in individual  cases  into  political  life  as  well,  indeed  even  straight into  the sciences. Wherever we perceive human endeavours to be tinted with a
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
higher,  gloomier  colouring,  we can  assume  that  dread  of spirits,  the
odour of incense and the shadows of churches are still adhering to them.
How metre beautifies . - Metre lays a veil over reality: it effectuates a certain
artificiality of speech and unclarity of thinking; by  means of the shadows
it throws over thoughts it now conceals, now brings into prominence. As
beautification  requires  shadows,  so  clarification  requires  'vagueness' .  -
Art  makes  the  sight  of life  bearable by  laying over it the  veil  of unclear
thinking.
Art of the ugly soul. - One imposes far too narrow limitations on art when
one  demands  that  only  well-ordered,  morally  balanced  souls  may
express themselves in it.  As in the plastic arts, so in music and poetry too
there is an art of the ugly soul beside the art of the beautiful  soul; and the
mightiest  effects  of  art,  that  which  tames  souls,  moves  stones  and  humanizes the beast,  have perhaps been mostly  achieved by precisely that art.
1 53
Art makes the thinker's heart heavy. - How strong the metaphysical need is,
and how hard nature makes it to bid it a final farewell, can be seen from
the fact that even  when  the free spirit has divested himself of everything
metaphysical  the  highest  effects  of art  can  easily  set  the  metaphysical
strings,  which  have long been silent or indeed snapped apart,  vibrating
in sympathy; so it can happen, for example, that a passage in Beethoven's
Ninth Symphony will make him feel he is hovering above the earth in a
dome of stars with the dream of immortality in his heart: all the stars seem
to  glitter  around  him  and  the  earth  seems  to  sink  farther  and  farther
away. - If he becomes aware of being in this condition he feels a profound
stab in the heart and sighs for the man who will lead him back to his lost
love, whether she be called religion or metaphysics. It is in such moments
that his intellectual probity is put to the test.
Playing with  life.  - The  facility  and  frivolity  of the Homeric  fantasy  was
necessary  for  soothing  the  immoderately  passionate  disposition  and
over-subtle  intellect  of  the  Greeks  and  temporarily  banishing  them.
When  their intellect  speaks,  how cruel and bitter life  appears!  They  do
not deceive themselves, but they deliberately and playfully embellish life
with lies. Simonides* advised his compatriots to take life as a game; they
were only too familiar with its painful seriousness (for the misery of mankind is among the favourite themes  for song among the gods),  and they knew  that  even  misery  could  become  a  source  of  enjoyment  solely
through  art.  As  a  punishment  for  this  insight,  however,  they  were  so
plagued  by a delight in telling stories that it was hard for them to desist
from lies and deception in the course of everyday life - just as all poetical
• Simonides (c.  556 to c.  468 BC), Greek poet
F R O M  T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I STS  A N D   W R I T E R S
people take a delight in lying,  a delight that is moreover quite innocent.
The neighbouring nations were no doubt sometimes reduced to despair
by it.
Belief in inspiration. - Artists have an interest in the existence of a belief in
the  sudden occurrence of ideas,  in so-called inspirations; as though  the
idea  of  a  work  of  art,  a  poem,  the  basic  proposition  of  a  philosophy
flashed down from heaven  like a  ray  of divine grace.  In reality,  the  imagination  of a good artist or thinker is  productive continually,  of good, mediocre and bad things, but his power of judgement, sharpened and practised to the highest degree, rejects,  selects, knots together; as we can now see from Beethoven's notebooks how  the  most glorious  melodies  were
put together gradually and as it were culled out of many beginnings.  He
who  selects  less  rigorously  and  likes  to  give  himself  up  to  his imitative
memory can, under the right circumstances, become a great improviser;
but  artistic  improvisation  is  something  very  inferior  in  relation  to  the
serious  and  carefully  fashioned  artistic  idea.  All  the  great  artists  have
been great workers, inexhaustible not only in invention but also in rejecting, sifting, transforming, ordering.
Inspiration again.  - If  productive  power has been blocked  for a  time  and
prevented from flowing out by an obstruction, there occurs in the end an
effusion so sudden it appears that an immediate inspiration without any
preliminary labour,  that is to say a miracle,  has taken  place.  This constitutes the familiar deception with whose continuance the interest of all artists is, as aforesaid,  a little too much involved.  The capital has only been accumulated, it did not fall from the sky all at once.  Similar apparent inspiration is also to be found in other domains, for example in that of goodness, virtue,  vice.
The sufferings of genius and their value. - The artistic genius wants to give
pleasure, but if he stands on a very high level there can easily be a lack of
others to enjoy it; he offers food but no one wants it. This sometimes bestows  upon  him a  moving and  ludicrous  pathos;  for fundamentally  he has  no right to compel people to  enjoy  themselves.  He  sounds  his pipe
but no one wants to dance: can that be tragic? - Perhaps it can.  After all,
he has, as a compensation for this privation,  more enjoyment in creating
than other people have in any other species of activity.  His sufferings are
felt to be exaggerated because the sound of his lamentations is louder, his
mouth more persuasive; and sometimes his sufferings really are great, but
only because his ambition and envy are so great.  The genius of knowledge, such as Kepler and Spinoza,  is usually not so covetous and does not make such a commotion over his sufferings and privations, which are
actually greater. He can be more certain of posterity and divest himself of
the present; whereas an artist who does this is always playing a desperate
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
game which must fill him with trepidation. In very rare cases - when the
genius of ability and of knowledge is amalgamated with moral genius in
the same individual - there is added to the sufferings referred to a species
of suffering  that  one  must  take  to be the  most  singular  exception in the
world:  an  extra- and  supra-personal  sensibility  attuned  to  a  nation,  to
mankind,  to a whole culture, to all suffering existence: which acquires its
value  through  its  connection  with  very  difficult  and  remote  forms  of
knowledge  (pity  in  itself is of little  value).  - But by  what standard,  on
what scales can we measure whether or not it is genuine? Is it not almost
obligatory to mistrust all who speak of possessing sensibilities of this sort?
Fatality of greatness.  Every great phenomenon is succeeded by degener
-
ation,  especially in the domain of art. The example of greatness incites all
vainer  natures to extreme  imitation  or attempts to  outdo; in addition to
which,  all  great  talents  have  the  fatal  property  of  suppressing  many
weaker  shoots  and forces and as  it were  laying  nature waste all around
them. The most fortunate thing that can happen in the evolution of an art
is that several geniuses appear together and keep one another in bounds;
in the  course  of this  struggle  the  weaker  and  tenderer natures  too will
usually be granted light and air.
Art dangerous to the artist.  - When art seizes violently on an individual it
draws him back to the conceptions  of those ages in which art flourished
most  mightily,  and  then  it  effects  a  retrogression  in  him.  The  artist
acquires  increasing  reverence  for  sudden  excitations,  believes  in  gods
and  demons,  instils  a  soul  into  nature,  hates  the  sciences,  becomes
changeable of mood  as were  the  men  of antiquity and longs for an overthrowing of everything unfavourable to art,  and he does this with all the vehemence  and  unreasonableness  of  a  child.  The  artist  is  in  himself
already a retarded being, inasmuch as he has halted at games that pertain
to  youth  and  childhood:  to  this  there  is  now  added  his  gradual  retrogression to earlier times. Thus there at last arises a violent antagonism between  him and  the  men  of  his  period,  of  his  own  age,  and  his  end  is gloomy;  just  as,  according  to  the  tales  told  in  antiquity,  Homer  and
Aeschylus at last lived and died in melancholia.
Created people.  - When  we  say  the  dramatist  (and  the  artist  in  general)
actually creates characters,  this is a nice piece of deception and exaggeration in the existence and dissemination of which art celebrates one of its unintentional and as it were superfluous triumphs.  In reality we understand  very  little  of an  actual  iiving  person  and  generalize  very  superficially  when  we  attribute  to  him  this  or  that  character:  well,  the  poet adopts the same very imperfect posture  towards man as we do,  in that his
sketches of men are just as superficial as is our knowledge of men. There is
much illusion involved in these created characters of the artists; they are
FROM  T H E   S O U L S   OF  A RTISTS  A N D  WRITERS
in no way living products of nature,  but,  like painted people, a little too
thin,  they  cannot  endure  inspection  from  close  to.  And  if one  should
even venture to say that the character of the ordinary living man is often
self-contradictory  and  that  created  by  the  dramatist  the  ideal  that
hovered dimly before the eye of nature,  this would be quite wrong.  An
actual human being is  something altogether necessary (even in  those socalled contradictions), but we do not always recognize this necessity. The invented  human  being,  the  phantasm,  desires  to  signify  something
necessary, but only in the eyes of those who comprehend even an actual
human being only in a crude, unnatural simplification: so that a couple of
striking, often repeated characteristics, with a great deal of light on them
and a great deal of shadow and twilight around them, suffice to meet all
their demands.  They are  thus quite ready to  treat phantasms as actual,
necessary human beings because they are accustomed when dealing with
actual  human  beings  to  take  a  phantasm,  a  silhouette,  an  arbitrary
abridgement  for  the  whole.  - That  the  painter  and  the  sculptor,  of  all
people, give expression to the 'idea' of the human being is mere fantasizing and sense-deception: one is being tyrannized over by the eye when one says  such a  thing,  since this sees even of the human body only the
surface,  the  skin;  the  inner body,  however,  is  just  as  much  part of the
idea.  Plastic art wants to make characters visible on the outside; the art of
speech employs the word to the same end, it delineates the character in
sounds.  Art  begins  from  the  natural  ignorance  of  mankind  as  to  his
interior (both bodily and as regards character): it does not exist for physicists or philosophers.
Self-overestimation in the belief in artists and philosophers. - We all think that a
work of art, an artist,  is proved to be of high quality if it seizes hold on us
and  profoundly  moves us.  But  for this  to  be  so  our own high quality in
judgement and sensibility would first have to have been proved: which is
not the case.  Who in the realm of the plastic arts has moved and enraptured  more  than  Bernini,  who has  produced a  mightier effect  than  that post-Demosthenes rhetor* who introduced the Asiatic style and caused it
to predominate for two centuries? Such a predomination over entire centuries proves nothing in regard to the quality or lasting validity of a style; that is why one should never be  too firm in  one's  faith in any  artist:  for
such a faith is not only faith in the veracity of our sensibility but also in the
infallibility of our judgement, while our judgement or sensibility, or both
of  them,  can  themselves  be  too  coarse  or  too  refined,  exaggerated  or
gross.  The blessings and raptures conferred by a philosophy or a religion
likewise prove nothing in regard to their truth:  just as little as the happiness the madman enjoys from his idee fixe proves anything in regard to its rationality.
Cult of the genius  out of vanity.  Because we  think well of ourselves,  but
-
•  Hegesias of Magnesia  (c.  250 BC),  of the school of Cyrenaic philosophers
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
nonetheless  never  suppose  ourselves  capable  of producing  a  painting
like one  of Raphael's or a  dramatic  scene  like one of Shakespeare's,  we
convince ourselves that the capacity to  do  so is quite ext::aordinarily marvellous,  a  wholly  uncommon  accident,  or,  if  we  are  still  religiously inclined,  a mercy from on high. Thus our vanity,  our self-love,  promotes
the cult of the  genius:  for  only  if we think of him as being  very  remote
from us,  as a miraculum, does he not aggrieve us (even Goethe,  who was
without envy,  called  Shakespeare his star of the most distant heights;  in
regard  to  which  one  might  recall  the  line:  'the  stars,  these  we  do  not
desire').  But,  aside  from  these suggestions of our  vanity,  the  activity  of
the  genius  seems  in  no  way  fundamentally  different  from  the  activity
of the inventor of machines, the scholar of astronomy or history, the master
of  tactics.  All  these  activities  are  explicable  if  one  pictures  to  oneself
people whose  thinking is active in one direction,  who employ everything
as material, who always zealously observe their own inner life and that of
others, who perceive everywhere models and incentives, who never tire
of  combining  together  the  means  available  to  them.  Genius  too  does
nothing except learn first how to lay bricks then how to build, except continually  seek  for  material  and  continually  form  itself  around  it.  Every activity  of  man  is  amazingly  complicated,  not  only  that  of  the  genius:
but none is a 'miracle' . - Whence,  then,  the belief that genius exists only
in  the  artist,  orator  and  philosopher?  that  only  they  have  'intuition'?
(Whereby  they  are  supposed  to  possess  a  kind  of  miraculous eyeglass
with which they can see directly into 'the essence of the thing'!) It is clear
that people  speak of genius  only where  the effects of the great  intellect
are most pleasant to them and where they have no desire to feel envious.
To call someone 'divine' means:  'here there is no need for us to compete'.
Then,  everything  finished  and  complete  is  regarded  with  admiration,
everything still becoming is under-valued. But no one can see in the work
of the artist how it has become; that is its advantage, for wherever one can
see the act of becoming one grows somewhat cool. The finished and perfect art of representation repulses all thinking as to how it has become; it tyrannizes  as  present  completeness  and  perfection.  That  is  why  the
masters of the art of representation count above all as gifted with genius
and  why men of science do not.  In  reality,  this evaluation of the  former
and  undervaluation  of  the  latter  is  only  a  piece  of  childishness  in  the
realm of reason.
The serious workman. - Do not talk about  giftedness,  inborn  talents!  One
can name great men of all kinds who were very little gifted. They acquired
greatness, became 'geniuses'  (as  we  put  it),  through qualities the lack of
which  no  one  who  knew  what they  were  would  boast  of:  they  all possessed that seriousness of the efficient workman which first learns to construct the parts properly before it ventures to fashion a great whole; they allowed  themselves  time  for  it,  because  they  took  more  pleasure  in
making  the  little,  secondary  things  well  than  in  the  effect  of a  dazzling
F R O M   THE  S O U L S   OF  ARTISTS  A N D   W R ITERS
whole.  The  recipe  for becoming a  good novelist,  for example,  is easy to
give,  but to carry it out presupposes qualities one is accustomed to overlook when one says 'I do not have enough talent.' One has only to make a hundred  or  so  sketches  for  novels,  none  longer  than  two  pages  but  of
such distinctness that every word in them is necessary;  one should  write
down  anecdotes  each  day  until  one  has  learned  how  to  give  them  the
most pregnant and effective form; one should be tireless in collecting and
describing  human  types  and  characters;  one  should  above  all  relate
things to others and  listen  to others relate,  keeping  one's  eyes and ears
open  for  the effect produced  on  those present,  one  should  travel like  a
landscape  painter  or  costume  designer;  one  should  excerpt  for  oneself
out  of  the  individual  sciences  everything  that  will  produce  an  artistic
effect when it is well described, one should, finally, reflect on the motives
of human actions, disdain no signpost to instruction about them and be a
collector of these things  by  day and  night.  One  should  continue  in  this
many-sided  exercise  some  ten  years:  what  is  then created in  the workshop, however, will be fit to go out into the world. - What, however, do most people do? They begin, not with the parts, but with the whole.  Perhaps they chance to strike a right note, excite attention and from then on strike worse  and  worse  notes,  for  good,  natural  reasons.  - Sometimes,
when the character and intellect needed to formulate such a life-plan are
lacking, fate and need take their place and lead the future master step by
step through all the stipulations of his trade.
Peril and profit in the cult of the genius. - The belief in great,  superior,  fruitful spirits is not necessarily, yet nonetheless is very frequently associated with that religious or semi-religious superstition that these spirits are of
supra-human origin and possess certain miraculous abilities by virtue of
which they acquire their knowledge by quite other means than the rest
of mankind. One ascribes to them, it seems, a direct view of the nature of
the world, as it were a hole in the cloak of appearance, and believes that,
by virtue of this miraculous seer's vision,  they are able to communicate
something conclusive and decisive about man and the world without the
toil and rigorousness required by science. As long as there continue to be
those who believe in the miraculous in the domain of knowledge one can
perhaps concede that these people themselves derive some benefit from
their belief,  inasmuch  as  through  their  unconditional  subjection  to  the
great  spirits  they  create  for  their  own  spirit  during  its  time of development the finest form of discipline and schooling. On the other hand, it is at  least  questionable  whether  the  superstitious  belief  in  genius,  in  its
privileges and special abilities, is of benefit to the genius himself if it takes
root in him. It is in any event a dangerous sign when a man is assailed by
awe of himself, whether it be the celebrated Caesar's awe of Caesar or the
awe  of one's  own  genius  now  under  consideration;  when  the  sacrificial
incense  which  is  properly  rendered  only  to  a  god  penetrates  the  brain
of the  genius,  so  that his  head begins  to swim  and  he comes  to  regard
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
himself as something supra-human. The consequences that slowly result
are:  the feeling of irresponsibility, of exceptional rights, the belief that he
confers  a  favour  by  his  mere  presence,  insane  rage  when  anyone
attempts even to compare him with others,  let alone to rate him beneath
them,  or  to  draw  attention  to  lapses  in  his  work.  Because  he  ceases  to
practise  criticism of himself,  at last one  pinion after the other falls out of
his plumage:  that superstitious belief eats at the roots of his powers and
perhaps even turns him into a hypocrite after his powers have fled from
him.  For  the great spirits  themselves  it  is therefore  probably  more beneficial if they acquire an insight into the nature and origin of their powers, if  they  grasp,  that  is  to  say,  what  purely  human  qualities  have  come
together in them  and what fortunate circumstances attended them: in the
first  place  undiminishing  energy,  resolute  application  to  individual
goals,  great  personal  courage,  then  the  good  fortune  to  receive  an
upbringing which offered  in  the early years the finest  teachers,  models
and  methods.  To  be  sure,  when  their  goal  is  the  production  of  the
greatest  possible  effect,  unclarity  with  regard  to  oneself and  that  semiinsanity superadded to it has  always  achieved  much;  for what  has been admired and  envied at all times has been that power in them by virtue of
which they render men will-less and sweep them away into the delusion
that  the  leaders  they are following are  supra-natural.  Indeed,  it elevates
and  inspires  men  to  believe  that  someone  is  in  possession  of  supranatural  powers:  to  this  extent  Plato  was  right  to  say  that  madness  has brought  the  greatest  of  blessings  upon  mankind.  - In  rare  individual
cases this portion of madness may, indeed, actually have been the means
by  which  such  a  nature,  excessive  in  all  directions,  was  held  firmly
together:  in  the  life  of individuals,  too,  illusions  that  are  in  themselves
poisons often play the role of healers; yet, in the end, in the case of every
'genius'  who believes in  his own  divinity  the poison shows itself to  the
same  degree  as his  'genius'  grows  old: one may  recall,  for  example,  the
case of Napoleon,  whose  nature certainly grew into the mighty unity that
sets him apart from all men of modern times precisely through his belief
in  himself and  his  star and  through  the  contempt  for  men  that  flowed
from  it;  until  in  the  end,  however,  this  same  belief  went  over  into  an
almost insane fatalism, robbed him of his acuteness and swiftness of perception, and became the cause of his destruction.
Genius and nullity.  - It is  precisely the original heads among the  artists,
those who draw on resources that are their own, who can sometimes produce  the  empty  and  hollow,  while the more dependent natures,  the  socalled talents,  full of recollections of everything imaginable are able even when  they  are  at  their  weakest  to  produce  something  tolerable.  If  the
originals  are  deserted  by  themselves  recollection  renders  them  no  aid:
they become empty.
The public.  - The people really demands of tragedy no more than to be
F R O M   THE  S O U L S   OF  A R T I STS  A N D   W R I T E R S
thoroughly moved so as for once to have a good cry; the artist who sees a
new tragedy, on the other hand,  takes pleasure in the ingenious technical
inventions  and  artifices,  in  the  handling  and  apportionment  of  the
material, in the new application of old motifs and old ideas. - His attitude
is the aesthetic attitude to the work of art, that of the creator; the one first
described, which pays attention only to the material, is that of the people.
Of the man between them there is nothing to be said; he is neither people
nor  artist and does  not know what he  wants:  thus  his pleasure,  too,  is
obscure and  slight.
Artistic education of the public. - If the same motif has not been treated in a
hundred different ways by various masters, the public never learns to get
beyond interest  in the  material  alone;  but once it has come to be familiar
with the motif from numerous versions of it, and thus no longer feels the
charm of novelty and anticipation, it will then be able to grasp and enjoy
the nuances and subtle new inventions in the way it is treated.
The  artist and his following  must keep  in step.  - Progress  from  one  stylistic
level to the next  must proceed so  slowly that not only the artists but the
auditors  and  spectators  too  can  participate  in  this  progress  and  know
exactly  what  is  going  on.  Otherwise  there  suddenly  appears  that  great
gulf between  the  artist  creating  his  works  on  a  remote  height  and  the
public which, no longer able to attain to that height,  at length disconsolately climbs back down again deeper than before.  For when the artist no longer  raises  his  public  up,  it  swiftly  sinks  downwards,  and  it plunges
the deeper and more perilously the higher a genius has borne it, like the
eagle from whose claws the tortoise it has carried up into the clouds falls
to its death.
Origin of the comic.  - If one considers that man was for many hundreds of
thousands of years an animal in the highest degree accessible to fear and
that everything  sudden and  unexpected bade him prepare  to  fight and
perhaps to die; that even later on, indeed, in social relationships all security depended on the expected and traditional in opinion and action; then one cannot be surprised if whenever something sudden and unexpected
in  word  and  deed  happens  without  occasioning  danger  or  injury  man
becomes  wanton,  passes  over  into  the  opposite  of  fear:  the  anxious,
crouching creature springs up, greatly expands - man laughs. This transition  from  momentary  anxiety  to  short-lived  exuberance  is  called  the comic.  In  the  phenomenon of the tragic,  on the other hand,  man passes
swiftly from great, enduring wantonness and high spirits into great fear
and  anguish;  since,  however,  great,  enduring  wantonness  and  high
spirits is much rarer among mortals than occasions for fear, there is much
more of the comic than the tragic in the world; we laugh much more often
than we are profoundly shaken.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Artist's ambition. - The Greek artists, the tragedians for example, poetized
in order to conquer; their whole art cannot be thought of apart from contest:  Hesiod's good Eris, * ambition, gave their genius its wings. Now this ambition demands above all  that their work should  preserve the highest
excellence in  their own eyes,  as they understand  excellence,  that is to say,
without reference to a dominating taste or the general opinion as to what
constitutes excellence in a work of art; and thus Aeschylus and Euripides
were for a long time unsuccessful until they had finally educated judges of
art  who  assessed  their  work according to the standards they themselves
laid down.  It is thus they aspire to victory over their competitors as they
understand  victory,  a  victory before  their own  seat of judgement,  they
want actually to be more excellent; then they exact agreement from others
as to their own assessment of themselves and  confirmation of their own
judgement.  To  aspire  to  honour  here  means:  'to  make  oneself superior
and to wish this superiority to be publicly acknowledged' .  If the former is
lacking and the latter nonetheless still demanded,  one speaks of vanity. If
the latter is lacking and  its absence  not regretted,  one speaks of pride.
The necessary in a work of art. - Those who talk so much of the necessary in
a work of art exaggerate, if they are artists, in majorem artis gloriam,t or, if
they are laity, out of ignorance. The forms of a work of art which express
the  ideas  contained  in  it,  its  mode  of speech that is to  say,  always have
something easy-going about  them,  like all forms of speech. The sculptor
can  add  many  little  details  or  leave  them  out:  the  performer  likewise,
whether he be an actor or, in the realm of music, a virtuoso or conductor.
These many little details and elaborations today appeal to him, tomorrow
not;  they exist for the sake of the artist  rather than for that of the art,  for
he  too,  given  the  rigorousness  and  self-constraint the representation  of
his principal idea demands of him, occasionally requires sweetmeats and
playthings if he is not to grow sullen and morose.
Causing the master to be forgotten. - The pianist who performs the work of a
master  will  have  played  best  when  he  makes  his  listeners  forget  the
master, when it seems as though he is relating a tale from his own life or is
experiencing something at that very moment. To be sure, if he himself is
nothing  of  consequence  his  listeners  will  execrate  the  loquacity  with
which he tells us about himself. He thus has to know how to engage the
imagination of his listeners on his own behalf. Conversely, it is this which
accounts for all the weaknesses and  follies of 'the virtuoso'.
Corriger Ia fortune.t Evil chances occur in the lives of great artists such as
•  Hesiod (c. 8oo BC), Greek poet, distinguishes Eris as a goddess of peaceable competition
from  'terrible  Eris',  bringer  of  war  and  strife.  Also  referred  to  in  'The  wanderer  and  his
shadow', section 29.
t  in miljorem artis gloriam: to the greater glory of art
t  Carriger Ia fortune: to  compensate for the deliverances of fate
F R O M   T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I S T S   A N D   W R I T E R S
compel a  painter,  for  instance,  to leave  his  finest picture in the  form of
mere  hurried  sketches,  or which compelled  Beethoven,  for example,  to
leave  behind  to  us  in  many  great  sonatas  (as  in  the  case  of the  great  B
major)*  only an unsatisfactory  piano  arrangement of a  symphony.  Here
the artist coming after ought to try posthumously to amend the life of the
master:  which  is  what  he  would  do,  for  example,  who,  as a  master  of
orchestration,  should  waken  to  life  for  us  that  symphony now  lying  in
the death-trance of the piano.
Diminution.  - There  are  many  things,  events  or  people  which  cannot
endure being reduced in scale. The Laokoon groupt cannot be reduced to
a trinket; it needs to be large.  But it is much rarer for something small by
nature to be able to endure enlargement; which is why biographers will
always have better success in diminishing the size of a great man than in
enlarging that of a  small one.
Sensuality  in  contemporary art.  - Artists  nowadays  often  go  wrong  when
they labour to make their works of art produce a  sensual effect; for their
spectators or auditors are no longer in possession of a full sensuality and
the  effect  which,  quite  contrary  to  his  intention,  the  artist's  work  produces upon them is a feeling of 'saintliness' closely related to boredom.
Their sensuality perhaps  commences  just where the artist's ceases; thus
they encounter one another at one point at the most.
Shakespeare  as  moralist.  - Shakespeare  reflected  a  great  deal  on  the
passions and from his temperament probably had very intimate access to
many  of  them  (dramatists  are  in  general  somewhat  wicked  men).  But,
unlike Montaigne,:j: he was incapable of discoursing on them; instead of
which  he  placed  observations  about  the  passions  into  the  mouths  of
impassioned  characters:  a  practice  which,  though  counter  to  nature,
makes his plays so full of ideas they make all others seem empty and can
easily  arouse  in  us  a  repugnance  to  them.  - The  maxims  of  Schiller§
(which are almost always based on ideas either false or trite) are designed
purely  for  the  theatre,  and  as  such  they  are  extremely effective:  while
Shakespeare's do honour to his model,  Montaigne,  and contain entirely
serious ideas in a polished form, but are for that reason too remote and
subtle for the theatre public and thus ineffective.
Getting oneself heard well. - One has to  know,  not only  how to play well,
•  Beethoven's piano sonata no. 29 in B flat major, Op.  106, 'Hammerklavier'
t  Laokoon  group:  Hellenistic  statue,  from  the  Golden  House of Nero,  representing  the
Trojan priest Laokoon and his two sons being crushed by giant serpents
+  Montaigne: Michel de Montaigne (1533-92): French essayist
§  Schiller: Friedrich von Schiller (1759-18o5): German poet, dramatist and historian
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
but  also  how to get  oneself heard  well.  The  violin in the  hands of the
greatest master will emit only a chirp if the room is too big; and then the
master sounds no better than any bungler.
The  effectiveness  of the  incomplete.  - Just  as  figures  in  relief  produce  so
strong an impression on the imagination because they are as it were on
the point of stepping out of the wall but have suddenly been brought to a
halt, so the relief-like, incomplete presentation of an idea, of a whole philosophy, is sometimes more effective than its exhaustive realization: more is left for the beholder to do, he is impelled to continue working on that
which  appears  before  him  so  strongly  etched  in  light  and  shadow,  to
think it through to the end,  and  to overcome even that constraint which
has hitherto  prevented it from stepping forth fully formed.
Against originality. - When art dresses itself in the most worn-out material
it is most easily  recognized as art.
18o
Collective spirit. - A good writer pm:sesses not only his own spirit but also
the spirit of his friends.
Twofold  misjudgement.  - The  misfortune  suffered  by  dear-minded  and
easily understood writers is that they are taken for shallow and thus little
effort is expended on reading them: and the good fortune that attends the
obscure is  that the reader toils at  them and ascribes to them the pleasure
he has in fact gained from his own zeal.
Relationship to science. - They lack a true interest in a science who begin to
become enthusiastic about it only when they themselves have made discoveries in it.
The key. - A man of significance may set great store by an idea and all the
insignificant  laugh  and  mock  at  him  for  it:  to  him  it is a  key  to hidden
treasure-chambers, while to them it is no more than a piece of old iron.
Untranslatable.  - It  is  neither  the  best  nor  the  worst  in  a  book  that  is
untranslatable in it.
Author's  paradoxes.  - The  so-called  paradoxes  of an  author  to  which  a
reader takes exception very often stand not at all in the author's book but
in the reader's head.
Wit. - The wittiest authors evoke the least perceptible smile.
F R O M   T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I S T S   A N D   WRITERS
The antithesis. - The antithesis is the narrow gateway through which error
most likes to creep into truth.
Thinkers as stylists. - Most thinkers write badly because they communicate
to us not only their thoughts but also the thinking of their thoughts.
Thought in poetry. - The poet conducts his thoughts along festively, in the
carriage of rhythm:  usually because they are incapable of walking on foot.
Sin against the spirit of the reader. - If the author denies his talent merely so
as to place himself on a level with his reader,  he commits the only mortal
sin the latter will never forgive him - supposing, that is, he notices it. One
may  say anything ill of a  man one  likes:  but i·n  the way one  says it one
must know how to restore his vanity again.
Limit of honesty. - Even the most honest writer lets fall a word too many
when he wants to round off a period.
The best author. - The best author will be he who is ashamed to become a
writer.
Draconian law against writers. - Writers ought to be treated as malefactors
who deserve to be freed or pardoned only in the rarest cases: this would
be a way of preventing the proliferation of books.
The licensed fools of modern culture. - The  licensed fools of the courts of the
Middle  Ages  have  their  counterpart  in  our feuilletonists:*  they  are  the
same species of man, half-rational, witty, extravagant, silly, sometimes in
attendance only to ameliorate heaviness of mood and to drown down the
all too weighty solemn clangour of great events; formerly in the service of
princes and the nobility, now in the service of the parties (just as a good
deal of the ancient submissiveness of the people in their commerce with
princes  still  lives  on  in  party  feeling and  party  discipline).  The  whole
modem  literary  world,  however,  stands  very  near  to  the feuilletonists;
they  are  the  'licensed  fools  of modem  culture',  who  are  judged  more
gently when they are taken to be  not wholly of sound mind.  To regard
writing as a lifetime's profession ought fairly to be considered a kind of
folly.
After the Greeks. - Knowledge is at present very  much  obstructed by the
fact  that  all  words  have,  through  centuries  of  exaggerated  feeling,
•  feuilletonists: writers of pieces of light literature and criticism for French newspapers
H U M A N ,   A L L   TOO  H U M A N
become  vaporous  and  inflated.  The  higher  level  of culture  that  places
itself  under  the domination  (if not indeed  under  the  tyranny)  of knowledge has need of a great sobriety of feeling and a strong concentration of all  words;  in  which  matter the  Greeks  of the age of Demosthenes  have
preceded  us.* All  modern  writing  is  characterized  by  exaggeratedness;
and even when it is written simply the words it contains are felt too eccentrically.  Rigorous reflection,  terseness,  coldness,  simplicity,  deliberately pursued even to their limit,  self-containment of the feelings and silence in
general - that alone can help us. - Moreover, this cold manner of writing
and  feeling is now,  as a contrast, very stimulating: and in that there lies,
to be sure,  a great danger.  For biting coldness is just as much a stimulant
as a high degree of warmth.
Good narrators, bad explainers. - Many good  storytellers  possess an admirable psychological certainty and  consistency so long as it applies itself to the  actions  of their  characters,  in a  downright  ludicrous  contrast to  the
ineptitude of their psychological thinking: so that the degree of their culture  seems  at one  moment  exceptionally  high  and  the  next  regrettably low.  It  happens  all  too  often  that  the  explanations  they  give  of  their
heroes and their actions are palpably false - there can be no doubt about it,
however  improbable  it  may  sound.  Perhaps  the  greatest  pianist  has
reflected  very  little  on  technical  matters  and  the particular  virtue,  vice,
utility and educability of each finger (dactylic ethics), and blunders badly
whenever he speaks of such  things.
Writings of acquaintances and their readers.  - We  read the  writings  of our
acquaintances  (friends  and  foes)  in  a  twofold  sense,  inasmuch  as  our
knowledge continually whispers to us:  'this is by him, a sign of his inner
nature,  his experiences, his talent',  while another kind of knowledge at
the same time seeks to determine what his work is worth in itself, what
evaluation it deserves apart from its author,  what enrichment of knowledge it brings with it.  As goes without saying, these two kinds of reading and  evaluating  disturb  one  another.  Even  a  conversation  with  a  friend
will  bring  the  fruits  of knowledge  to  maturity  only  if both  finally  think
only of the matter in hand and forget they are friends.
Sacrifice of rhythm.  - Good  writers  alter  the  rhythm  of  many  periods
merely because they do not acknowledge  in the ordinary  reader the capacity  to  grasp  the  measure  followed  by  the  period  in  its  first version: they  make  it  easier  for  him  by  giving  preference  to  the  more  familiar
rhythms. - This consideration for the rhythmic incapacity of the presentday reader has already evoked many a  sigh,  for much has already been sacrificed  to  it.  - Is  something  similar  not  perhaps  happening  to  good
musicians?
•  Demosthenes (385-322 BC): Greek orator
FROM  T H E   S O U L S   OF  ARTISTS  A N D   WRITERS
The incomplete as artistic stimulant. - The incomplete is often more effective
than completeness,  especially in the case of the eulogy:  the aim of which
requires  precisely  an  enticing  incompleteness  as  an  irrational  element
which presents to the hearer's imagination the illusion of a dazzling sea
and obscures the coast on the other side,  that is to say the limitations of
the  object  to  be  eulogized,  as though in  a  fog. When one refers  to  the
known merits of a man and does so in detail and at length, it always gives
rise to the suspicion that these are his only merits. The complete eulogist
sets himself above the person eulogized, he appears to survey him. That is
why the complete produces a diminishing effect.
Warning to writers and teachers.  - He  who  has  once  written,  and  feels  in
himself  the  passion  of  writing,  acquires  from  almost  all  he  does  and
experiences only that which can be communicated through writing.  He
no  longer thinks  of himself but  of the writer and his public:  he  desires
insight, but not for his own private use. He who is a teacher is usually incapable  of  any  longer  doing  anything  for  his  own  benefit,  he  always thinks of the benefit of his pupils, and he takes pleasure in knowledge of
any kind only insofar as he can teach it. He regards himself in the end as a
thoroughfare of knowledge and as a means and instrument in general, so
that he has ceased to be serious with regard to himself.
Bad writers necessary. - There  will always have to be  bad writers,  for  they
answer to the taste of the immature, undeveloped age-group; these  have
their requirements as well as do the mature.  If human  life were  longer,
the  number  of  mature  individuals  would  preponderate  or  at  least  be
equal to that of the immature; as things are, however, most by far die too
young, that is to say there are always many more undeveloped intellects
with bad taste.  These, moreover, desire that their requirements be satisfied with the greater vehemence of youth, and they demand bad authors and get them.
Too near and  too far. - The reader and  the author often  fail to understand
one  another because  the  author  knows  his  theme  too  well  and  almost
finds it boring, so that he dispenses with the examples and illustrations of
which he knows hundreds; the reader,  however,  is unfamiliar with the
subject and can easily find it ill-established if examples and illustrations
are withheld from him.
A vanished preparation for art. - Of all  the  grammar  school  did,  the most
valuable thing was the  practice it afforded  in  Latin style:  for this was a
practice in art,  whereas all its other undertakings had only knowledge  as
their  objective.  To  accord  German  composition  a  premier  position  is
barbarism,  for  we  have  no  model  German  style  evolved  out  of  public
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
eloquence; if one wants to promote practice in thinking through German
composition,  however,  it is certainly better  for  the  time being to  forget
about style altogether, to discriminate, that is to say, between practice in
thinking  and  practice in  presentation.  The  latter ought to apply itself to
the  production  of  manifold  versions  of a  given  content  and  not  to  the
invention of this content itself. The mere presentation of a given content
was the task of Latin style, for which the teachers of antiquity possessed a
subtlety  of  hearing  which  has  long  since  been  lost.  Formerly  whoever
learned to write well in a modern language had this practice to thank for it
(now  one  is  compelled  to  send  oneself to  school with  the  older  French
writers); but even more: he acquired an idea of elevated and difficult form
and was prepared  for art in the only proper way, through practice.
Dark  and  too  bright  side by  side.  - Writers  who  in  general  are  unable  to
express  their  thoughts  with  clarity  will  in  individual  instances  take
pleasure in employing the strongest,  most  exaggerated  designations and
superlatives:  thus  producing  a  light-effect  like  torches  flaring  on  confused  forest pathways.
Painting in writing. - An object of significance will be best represented if,
like a chemist, one takes the colours for the painting from the object itself,
and  then  employs  them  like a  painter:  so  that the  outline is allowed  to
grow out of the boundaries and shadings of the colours. Thus the painting  will  acquire  something  of  the  ravishing  element  of  nature  which makes the object itself significant.
2o6
Books which teach one to dance. - There are writers who, by representing the
impossible  as  possible  and  speaking  of morality  and  genius  as  though
both were merely a  matter of wanting  them,  a  mere whim and caprice,
evoke a  feeling of  high-spirited  freedom,  as though man were  standing
on tiptoe and compelled to dance for sheer joy.
Uncompleted  thoughts.  - Just  as  it  is  not  only  adulthood  but  youth  and
childhood too  that possess value  in themselves and not merely as bridges
and thoroughfares, so incomplete thoughts also have their value. That is
why one must not torment a poet with subtle exegesis but content oneself
with the uncertainty of his horizon, as though the way to many thoughts
still lay open.  Let one stand on the threshold; let one wait as at the excavation of a  treasure:  it is as though a lucky find of profound import were about to be made. The poet anticipates something of the joy of the thinker
at the discovery of a vital idea and makes us desire it, so that we snatch at
it;  he,  however,  flutters  by  past  our  heads,  displaying  the  loveliest
butterfly-wings - and yet he eludes us.
The book become almost human. - Every writer is surprised anew how, once
g6
FROM  T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I STS  A N D   W R I T E R S
a book has detached himself from him, it goes on to live a life of its own; it
is to him as though a part of an insect had come free and was now going
its  own  way.  Perhaps  he  almost  forgets  it,  perhaps  he  raises  himself
above the views he has set down in it, perhaps he no longer even understands it and has lost those wings upon which he flew when he thought out that book:  during which time it seeks out its readers,  enkindles life,
makes happy,  terrifies,  engenders new works,  becomes the soul of new
designs  and  undertakings - in  short,  it lives like a being furnished with
soul and spirit and is yet not  human.  - That author has drawn the happiest lot who as an old man can say that all of life-engendering, strengthening,  elevating,  enlightening thought and feeling that was in him lives on in his writings, and that he himself is now nothing but the grey ashes,
while the fire has everywhere been rescued and borne  forward. - If one
now  goes  on  to  consider  that,  not  only  a  book,  but  every  action  performed  by  a  human  being  becomes  in  some  way  the  cause  of  other actions, decisions,  thoughts,  that everything that happens is inextricably
knotted to everything that will happen, one comes to recognize the existence  of an  actual  immortality,  that  of  motion:  what  has  once  moved  is enclosed and eternalized in  the  total  union of all being like  an insect in
amber.
Joy  in age.  - The  thinker,  and  the  artist  likewise,  whose  better  self has
taken refuge in his work, feels an almost malicious joy when he sees how
his body and his spirit are being slowly broken down and destroyed by
time: it is as though he observed from a corner a thief working away at his
money-chest, while knowing that the chest is empty and all the treasure
it contained safe.
Quiet fruitfulness.  - The born aristocrats of the spirit are not too zealous:
their creations appear and fall from the tree on a quiet autumn evening
unprecipitately,  in  due  time,  not  quickly  pushed  aside  by  something
new.  The  desire  to  create  continually  is  vulgar  and  betrays  jealousy,
envy, ambition. If one is something one really does not need to make anything - and one nonetheless does very much. There exists above the 'productive' man a yet higher species.
Achilles and Homer. - It is always as between Achilles and Homer: the one
has the experience, the sensation,  the other describes it.  A true writer only
bestows words on the emotions and experiences of others, he is an artist
so as to divine much from the little he himself has felt.  Artists are by no
means men of great passion but they often pretend to be,  in  the  unconscious  feeling  that  their  painted  passions  will  seem  more believable  if their own life speaks for their experience in this field.  One has only to let
oneself go, to abandon self-control, to give rein to one's anger or desires:
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
at once all the world cries: how passionate he is! But deep-rooted passion,
passion  which  gnaws  at  the  individual  and  often  consumes  him,  is  a
thing  of some consequence:  he  who experiences  such  passion  certainly
does not describe it in dramas, music or novels. Artists are often unbridled
individuals  to  the  extent that they  are  not  artists:  but  that is  something
else.
Old  doubts  over  the effect  of art. - Are  fear and pity  really  discharged by
tragedy,  as  Aristotle  has  it,  so  that  the  auditor  goes  home  colder  and
more placid? Do ghost stories make one Jess fearful and superstitious? It
is  true  in  the  case  of certain  physical  events,  the  enjoyment  of  love  for
example, that with the satisfaction of a need an alleviation and temporary
relaxation of the drive occurs. But fear and pity are not in this sense needs
of definite  organs  which want to be relieved.  And in the long run a drive
is,  through  practice  in  satisfying  it,  intensified,  its  periodical  alleviation
notwithstanding.  It  is  possible  that in  each  individual  instance fear and
pity are  mitigated  and  discharged:  they could  nonetheless  grow greater
as a  whole  through  the  tragic effect  in  general,  and  Plato  could  still be
right  when  he  says  that  through  tragedy  one  becomes  generally  more
fearful  and  emotional.  The  tragic  poet  himself  would  then  necessarily
acquire a gloomy,  disheartened view of the world and a soft, susceptible,
tearful  soul,  and  it  would  likewise  accord  with  Plato's  opinion  of  the
matter if the tragic poet and with him whole city communities which take
especial delight in  him  should  degenerate to ever greater unbridledness
and  immoderation.  - But  what  right  has  our age  to  offer  an  answer  to
Plato's great question concerning the moral influence of art at all? Even if
we possessed art - what influence of any kind does art exercise among us?
Pleasure  in  nonsense.  - How  can  man  take  pleasure  in  nonsense?  For
wherever  in  the world  there  is  laughter  this  is  the  case;  one can  say,
indeed,  that  almost  everywhere  there  is  happiness  there  is  pleasure in
nonsense. The overturning of experience into its opposite, of the purposive into the purposeless, of the necessary into the arbitrary, but in such a way that this event causes no harm and is imagined as occasioned by high
spirits,  delights  us,  for it momentarily liberates us from the constraint of
the necessary,  the purposive and that which corresponds to our experience,  which we usually see as our inexorable masters; we play and laugh when the expected (which usually makes us fearful and tense) discharges
itself harmlessly.  It is the pleasure of the slave at the Saturnalia.
Ennoblement of reality. - The fact that men saw in the aphrodisiac drive a
divinity, and felt its operation within them with reverential gratitude,  has
over  the  course  of  time  saturated  that  affect  with  a  series  of  exalted
notions  and  actually very greatly  ennobled  it.  In the same way,  several
nations  have  by  virtue  of this  art of idealization created  for  themselves
F R O M   T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I S TS  A N D   W R ITERS
mighty aids to culture out of sicknesses: for example the Greeks,  who in
earlier centuries  suffered  from  great  nervous  epidemics  (in  the  form  of
epilepsy and St Vitus' dance) and fashioned from them the glorious type
of the bacchante. - For the Greeks were certainly not possessed of a square
and solid healthiness; - their secret was to honour even sickness as a god
if only it had power.
Music.  - Music is, of and in itself,  not so significant for our inner world,
nor so profoundly exciting,  that it  can  be  said  to  count as the  immediate
language of feeling; but its primeval union with poetry has deposited so
much symbolism into rhythmic movement, into the varying strength and
volume of musical sounds, that we now suppose it to speak directly to the
inner world  and to come from  the inner world. Dramatic music becomes
possible only when the tonal art has conquered an enormous domain of
symbolic  means,  through  song,  opera  and  a  hundred  experiments  in
tone-painting. 'Absolute music' is either form in itself, at a primitive stage
of music in  which sounds  made  in  tempo  and  at varying volume gave
pleasure as such,  or symbolism of form speaking to  the  understanding
without poetry after both arts had been united over a long course of evolution  and  the  musical  form  had  finally  become  entirely  enmeshed  in threads of feeling and concepts.  Men who have remained behind in the
evolution of music can understand in a purely formalistic way the same
piece of music as the more advanced understand wholly symbolically. In
itself, no music is profound or significant, it does not speak of the 'will' or
of the 'thing in itself'; the intellect could suppose such a thing only in an
age which had conquered for musical symbolism the entire compass of
the inner life.  It was the intellect itself which first  introduced this significance  into  sounds:  just as,  in  the  case  of architecture,  it likewise  introduced a significance into the relations between lines and masses which is in itself quite unknown to the laws of mechanics.
Gesture and language. - Older than language is the mimicking of gestures,
which takes place involuntarily and is even now,  when the language of
gesture  is  universally  restrained  and  control  of  the  muscles  has  been
achieved, so strong that we cannot see a mobile face without an innervation of our own face (one  can  observe  that feigned  yawning will evoke real yawning in one who sees it). The imitated gesture leads him who imitates it back to the sensation which it expressed in the face or body of the person imitated. That is how people learned to understand one another:
that is how a child still learns to understand its mother. In general, painful sensations may well also be expressed by gestures which in turn occasion pain (for example by pulling hair out,  beating the breast,  violent distortions and strainings of the facial muscles).  Conversely, gestures of
pleasure were themselves pleasurable and could thus easily convey their
meaning (laughter  as an expression  of being  tickled,  which is  pleasurable, again served as an expression of other pleasurable sensations). - As 99
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
soon as the meaning of gestures was understood, a symbolism of gestures
could arise:  I mean a  sign-language of sounds could be so agreed that at
first  one  produced  sound  and  gesture  (to  which  it  was  symbolically
joined),  later only the sound. - It appears  here  that in earlier ages there
often occurred that which now takes place before our eyes and ears in the
evolution of music,  especially of dramatic music: while music was at first
empty  noise  without  explanatory  dance  and  mime  (gesture-language),
the ear was,  through long  habituation to  the juxtaposition of music and
movement,  schooled to an instantaneous interpretation of the total figurations  and  has  at  last  attained  to  a  height  of  rapid  understanding  at which it no longer has any need of the visible movement and understands
the tone-poet without it.  One then speaks of absolute music, that is to say
of music in which everything is at once  understood  symbolically without
further assistance.
The desensualization of higher art. - By virtue of the extraordinary exercise
the  intellect  has  undergone  through  the  artistic  evolution  of  modern
music,  our  ears  have  grown  more  and  more  intellectual.  We  can  now
endure a  much  greater volume,  much  more 'noise',  than  our forefathers
could because we are much more practised in listening for the reason in it
than they were.  Because they at once inquire after the reason,  the 'meaning',  and  are no  longer content to  know  that a  thing  'is',  all our senses have in fact become somewhat blunted: a fact betrayed by,  for example,
the complete dominance  of the well-tempered tonal system; for ears that
can  still hear the subtle  distinction between for example C sharp and D
flat  are  now  exceptional.  In  this  matter  our  ears  have  become  coarser.
Then,  the ugly side of the world,  the side originally hostile to the senses,
has now been conquered  for music;  its sphere of power especially in the
domain of the sublime, dreadful and mysterious has therewith increased
astonishingly:  our music now brings  to  utterance  things  which formerly
had no tongue. In a similar way,  some of our painters have made our eyes
more intellectual and have gone far beyond that which was formerly called
pleasure  in  form  and  colour.  Here  too  the  side  of  the  world  that  originally counted as ugly  has been conquered by artistic reason. - What will be  the consequence of all this? The more  capable of thought eye and  ear
become, the closer they approach the point at which they become unsensual:  pleasure  is  transferred  to  the  brain,  the  sense-organs  themselves grow  blunt  and  feeble,  the  symbolic  increasingly  replaces  the  simple
being - and  along  this  path  we  thus  attain  to  barbarism as certainly  as
along any other.  For the moment we still believe: the world is uglier than
ever, but it signifies a more beautiful world than there has ever been.  But
the  more  attenuated  the  fragrant  odour  of  'significance'  becomes,  the
fewer there will be still able to perceive it: and the rest will finally be left
with  the  ugly,  which  they  will  try  to  enjoy  directly - an  endeavour in
which they are bound to  fail.  Thus there is in Germany a twofold current
of  musical  evolution:  on the one hand  a  host of ten  thousand  with ever
F R O M  T H E   S O U L S   OF  A R T I S T S   A N D   WRITERS
higher,  more  refined  demands,  listening  ever  more  intently  for  the
'meaning',  and on the other the enormous majority growing every year
more and more incapable of comprehending the meaningful even in the
form of  the sensually  ugly and  therefore  learning to  seize with  greater
and greater contentment the ugly and  disgusting  in itself,  that is to  say
the basely sensual,  in music.
Stone is more stony than it used to be. - In general we no longer understand
architecture;  at  least  we  do  not  do  so nearly as well  as we  understand
music. We have grown out of the symbolism of lines and figures, just as
we  have  weaned  ourselves  from  the sound-effects  of  rhetoric,  and  no
longer imbibe this kind of cultural mother's milk from the first moment of
our lives.  Everything in a Greek or Christian building originally signified
something, and indeed something of a higher order of things: this feeling
of inexhaustible  significance  lay  about  the  building  like  a  magical  veil.
Beauty  entered  this  sytem  only  incidentally,  without  essentially
encroaching upon the fundamental sense of the uncanny and exalted, of
consecration  by  magic and  the proximity  of the divine;  at  most beauty
mitigated the dread - but this dread was everywhere the presupposition. -
What is the beauty of a building to us today? The same thing as the beautiful face of a mindless woman: something mask-like.
Religious origin of modern music. - Music of feeling comes into being within
the  restored  Catholicism  that  followed  the  Council  of  Trent,*  through
Palestrina, t  who  assisted  the  newly  awakened  spirit  to  find  utterance;
later,  with  Bach,  it  extended  to  Protestantism  too,  insofar as Protestantism had been deepened  by the  Pietists:j: and detached from  its original dogmaticism.  The  presupposition  and  necessary  preliminary  for  both
developments is the occupation with music such as was practised during
the Renaissance and before it, and especially that scholarly concern with
it, at bottom scientific, that takes pleasure in the artifices of harmony and
counterpoint.  On  the  other hand,  opera was  also  a  necessary  preliminary:  for in  opera  the laity promulgated its  protest against a cold  music grown  too  learned  and  sought  to  restore  to  Polyhymnia§  her  soul.  -
Without  that  profoundly  religious  conversion,  without  that  resounding of the deeply agitated heart, music would have remained scholarly or operatic;  the  spirit  of  the  Counter-reformation  is  the  spirit  of modern
music  (for  that  Pietism  in  Bach's  music  is  also  a  kind  of  Counterreformation) .   This  is  how  profoundly  indebted  we  are  to  the  religious
•  Council of Trent: opened in 1545, it produced the reform of the Roman church known as
the Counter-reformation.
t  Palestrina  (1525--94):  Italian  composer  of  nearly  a  hundred  masses  who  eventually
entered the priesthood. In Pfitzner's opera, Palestrina, he is represented as divinely inspired to
write a mass  that persuaded the Council of Trent  not to ban polyphonic music.
f  Pietists: Lutheran followers of Phillip Jakob Spener, whose movement began in Frankfurt
in about 1670 and accorded to the individual immediate experience of the divine.
§  Polyhymnia: the muse of vocal music
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
life. - Music was the Counter-renaissance in the domain of art; to it belongs
the  later painting of Murillo,* perhaps the Baroque style does  too:  more
so,  at any rate,  than the  architecture  of the  Renaissance  or of antiquity.
And now one may go on to ask:  if our modern music could move stones,
would it set them together in the manner of the architecture of antiquity?
I  doubt  very  much  that  it  would.  For  that  which  reigns  in  music,  the
affect,  joy in enhanced,  wide-ranging moods,  the desire for liveliness at
any cost,  the rapid change of sensations, strong relief-effects in light and
shadow, the juxtaposition of the ecstatic and the naive - all  this reigned
once before in the plastic arts  and created new  stylistic  laws: - but it was
neither in antiquity  nor in the time of the Renaissance.
The Beyond in art.  - It is not without profound sorrow that one admits to
oneself  that  in  their  highest  flights  the artists  of all  ages  have  raised  to
heavenly transfiguration precisely those conceptions which we  now recognize as false:  they  are  the glorifiers of the religious  and  philosophical errors of mankind, and they could not have been so without believing in
the  absolute  truth of these  errors.  If belief in  such truth  declines in  general,  if  the  rainbow-colours  at  the  extreme  limits  of  human  knowledge and  supposition  grow  pale,  that  species  of art  can  never  flourish  again
which,  like the Divina Commedia, the pictures of Raphael,  the frescoes of
Michelangelo,  the Gothic cathedrals,  presupposes not only a cosmic but
also  a  metaphysical significance in  the objects of art.  A  moving  tale  will
one day be told how there once existed  such an art,  such an artist's faith.
The  revolution  in  poetry.  - The  stern  constraint  the  French  dramatists
imposed  upon  themselves  in  regard  to  unity  of action,  of  place <;�nd  of
time,  to  style,  to construction of verse  and  sentence,  to choice of words
and  ideas,  was as vital a  schooling as that of counterpoint and fugue in
the development of modern  music or as the Gorgian tropes in Greek rhetoric.  To fetter oneself in this way can seem absurd;  nonetheless  there is no way of getting free of naturalization than  that of first limiting oneself
to  what  is  most  severe  (perhaps also most capricious).  Thus one  gradually learns to walk with poise even upon narrow bridges spanning dizzying  abysses  and  brings  the  highest  suppleness  of  movement  home  as booty:  as has been  demonstrated  to  the  eyes of everyone now living by
the  history  of  music.  Here  we  see  how  the  fetters  grow  looser  step  by
step,  until  in  the  end  it  can  appear  as  though  they  have  been  wholly
thrown  off:  this  appearance is  the  supreme  outcome  of a  necessary  evolution  in  art.  No such gradual emergence out of self-imposed fetters has occurred in the case of modern  poetry.  Lessing made French form, t that
is to say the only modern  artistic form, into a laughing-stock in Germany
and pointed to Shakespeare, and thus we forewent the steady continuity
of that unfettering and made a leap into naturalism - that is to say, back to
•  Murillo: Bartolome Murillo (1618--82): Spanish painter
t Lessing: Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-81): German dramatist, critic and aesthetician
FROM  T H E   S O U L S   OF  A RT I STS  A N D   WRITERS
the beginnings of art. Goethe attempted to rescue himself from this situation through his ability again and again to impose differing kinds of constraint  upon  himself;  but  even  the  most  gifted  can  achieve  only  a continual experimentation once the thread of evolution has been broken.
Schiller owed his relative firmness of form to having modelled himself on
French tragedy,  which,  though  he  repudiated,  he  involuntarily  respected,  and  maintained  a  degree  of independence  of Lessing  (whose  dramatic  experiments  he  is  known  to  have  rejected).  After  Voltaire  the French themselves were suddenly  lacking in the great talents who could
have led  the evolution  of tragedy out of constraint on to that appearance
of freedom; later they too copied the Germans and made the leap into a
kind of Rousseauesque state of nature in art and experimented. One only
has to read Voltaire's Mahomet from time  to  time to bring clearly before
one's  soul what  European  culture  has lost once and  for all through  this
breach  with  tradition.  Voltaire  was  the  last  great  dramatist  to  subdue
through Greek moderation a  soul many-formed and equal to the mightiest  thunderstorms of tragedy - he  was able to do what no  German has yet been able to  do because the  nature of the Frenchman is much  more
closely related to the Greek than is the nature of the German - just as he
was also the  last great writer to  possess a  Greek ear,  Greek artistic conscientiousness,  Greek  charm  and  simplicity  in  the  treatment  of  prose speech; just as he was, indeed, one of the last men able to unite in himself
the  highest  freedom  of  spirit  and  an  altogether  unrevolutionary  disposition  without  being  inconsistent  and  cowardly.  Since  his  time  the modern  spirit,  with  its  restlessness,  its  hatred for bounds  and  moderation, has come to dominate in every domain, at first let loose by the fever of revolution  and  then,  when assailed by fear and  horror of itself,  again
laying  constraints  upon  itself - but  the  constraints  of  logic,  no  longer
those  of  artistic  moderation.  It  is  true  that  for  a  time  this  unfettering
enables  us  to  enjoy  the  poetry  of all  peoples,  all  that  has  grown  up in
hidden  places,  the  primitive,  wild-blooming,  strangely  beautiful  and
gigantically irregular, from the folksong up to the 'great barbarian' Shakespeare; we  taste the joys of local  colour and costumes such as all artistic nations have hitherto been strangers to; we make abundant employment
of the  'barbaric advantages'  of our age that Goethe urged against Schiller's  objections  so  as  to  set  the  formlessness  of  his  Faust  in  the  most favourable  light.  But  for  how  much  longer?  The  inbreaking  flood  of
poetry of all styles of all peoples  must  gradually  sweep away the  soil in
which  a  quiet,  hidden  growth  would  still  have  been  possible;  all  poets
must  become  experimenting  imitators  and  foolhardy  copiers,  however
great their powers may have been at first;  the  public,  finally,  which has
forgotten how to see in the harnessing of the powers of representation, in
the  mastering  of  all  the  expedients  of  art  and  their  organization,  the
actual artistic deed,  must increasingly value artistic power for its own sake,
indeed colour for its own sake, the idea for its own sake, inspiration for its
own  sake,  will consequently no longer enjoy the elements and terms of
the work  of art if not in isolation,  and  in  the long run make the natural
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
demand that the artist must also present them to it in isolation.  One has
indeed  thrown  off the  'unreasonable'  fetters  of Franco-Hellenic art,  but
without noticing it has accustomed oneself to finding all fetters, all limitation  unreasonble;  and  thus  art  moves  towards  its  dissolution  and  in doing so ranges - which is extremely instructive, to be sure - through all
the  phases  of its  beginnings,  its  childhood,  its  imperfection,  its  former
hazardous enterprises and extravagances: in going down to destruction it
interprets its birth and becoming.  One of the great upon whose instinct
one  can  no  doubt  rely  and  whose  theory  lacked  nothing  except  thirty
years  more of  practice  - Lord  Byron  once  said:  'So  far  as poetry  is  concerned,  the more I  reflect on it,  the more  firmly am  I convinced  that we are  all  on the wrong path,  every  one  of us. We all pursue a revolutionary
system inwardly false - our own or the next generation will arrive at the
same conviction.' It is this same Byron who says: 'I regard Shakespeare as
the worst  of models,  even  though the most extraordinary of poets.' And
does the mature artistic insight that Goethe  achieved in the second half of
his life not at bottom say exactly the same thing? - that insight with which
he gained such a start of a whole series of generations that one can assert
that on the whole Goethe has not yet produced any effect at all and that
his time is still to come? It is precisely because his nature held him for a
long  time  on  the  path  of  the  poetical  revolution,  precisely  because  he
savoured most thoroughly all that had been discovered in the way of new
inventions,  views and expedients through that breach with tradition and
as it were dug out  from beneath the ruins of art,  that  his  later transformation  and  conversion carries so much  weight:  it signifies that he felt the profoundest  desire  to  regain  the  traditional  ways  of  art  and  to  bestow
upon  the  ruins  and  colonnades  of  the  temple  that  still  remained  their
ancient wholeness and  perfection at any rate with the eye of imagination
if strength of arm should prove too weak to construct where such tremendous forces were needed even to destroy. Thus he lived in art as in recollection  of true  art:  his  writing  had  become  an  aid  to  recollection,  to  an understanding  of  ancient,  long  since  vanished  artistic  epochs.  His
demands were, to be sure,  having regard to the powers possessed by the
modern  age  unfulfillable;  the  pain  he  felt  at  that  fact  was,  however,
amply counterbalanced by the joy of knowing that they once had been fulfilled  and  that  we  too  can  still  participate  in  this  fulfilment.  Not  individuals, but more or less idealized masks; no actuality,  but an allegorical universalization;  contemporary  characters,  local  colour  evaporated
almost to invisibility and  rendered  mythical;  present-day  sensibility and
the  problems  of present-day  society compressed  to  the  simplest  forms,
divested of their stimulating,  enthralling,  pathological  qualities and rendered  ineffectual  in  every  sense  but  the  artistic;  no  novel  material  or characters,  but  the ancient and  long-familiar continually reanimated and
transformed:  this is art as Goethe later understood it,  as the Greeks and,
yes,  the French practised it.
F R O M   THE  S O U L S   OF  ARTI STS  A N D   W R ITERS
What is left of art. - It is true, certain metaphysical presuppositions bestow
much  greater  value  upon  art,  for  example  when  it  is believed  that  the
character is unalterable and that all characters and actions are a continual
expression of the nature of the world: then the work of the artist becomes
an  image  of  the  everlastingly  steadfast,  while  with  our  conceptions  the
artist can bestow upon his images validity only for a time, because man as
a whole has become and is changeable and even the individual man is not
something  firm  and  steadfast.  - The  same  would  be  so  in  the  case  of
another metaphysical  presupposition:  supposing our visible world were
only appearance, as the metaphysicians assume,  then art would come to
stand  quite close to the real world, for there would then be only too much
similarity between the world of appearance and the illusory world of the
artist; and  the difference  remaining  would even elevate the significance
of art above  the  significance of  nature,  because  art would  represent  the
uniform,  the  types  and  prototypes  of nature .  - These  presuppositions
are, however, false: after this knowledge what place still remains for art?
Above all, it has taught us for thousands of years to look upon life in any
of its forms with interest and pleasure, and to educate our sensibilities so
far  that  we  at last cry:  'life,  however  it  may be,  is good!'* This  teaching
imparted by art to take pleasure in life and to regard  the  human  life as a
piece of nature,  as the object of regular evolution, without being too violently involved in it - this teaching has been absorbed into us,  and it now reemerges as an almighty requirement of knowledge.  One could give up
art, but would not thereby relinquish the capacity one has learned from
it:  just  as one  has  given  up religion but not the enhancement of feeling
and exaltations one has acquired from it.  As the plastic arts and music are
the  measure  of  the  wealth  of  feelings  we  have  actually  gained  and
.obtained through religion,  so if art disappeared  the intensity and  multifariousness  of  the  joy  in  life  it  has  implanted  would  still  continue  to demand  satisfaction.  The  scientific  man  is  the  further evolution  of the
artistic.
Evening twilight of art. - Just as in old  age  one remembers one's youth and
celebrates  festivals  of remembrance,  so will mankind soon stand in  relation to art:  it will be a moving recollection of the joys of youth.  Perhaps art has never before been comprehended so profoundly or with so much
feeling as it  is  now,  when  the  magic  of death  seems  to  play around  it.
Recall  that Greek city  in  south  Italy  which  on one day  of the  year continued to celebrate their Greek festival and did so with tears and sadness at the fact that foreign barbarism was triumphing more and more over the
customs they had brought with them; it is to be doubted whether the Hellenic has ever been so greatly savoured,  or its golden nectar imbibed with so much relish, as it was among these declining Hellenes. The artist will
soon be regarded as a glorious relic,  and we shall bestow upon him, as a
•  The closing line of Goethe's 'Der Brautigam': 'Wie es auch sei, das Leben, es ist gut.'
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
marvellous  stranger upon whose  strength  and  beauty  the  happiness of
former ages depended,  honours such as we do not grant to others of our
own  kind.  The  best in  us has  perhaps  been  inherited from  the  sensibilities of earlier ages to which we hardly any longer have access by direct paths;  the sun has already  set,  but the sky of our life still glows with its
light,  even though we no longer see it.
TOKENS OF  HIGHER
AND
LOWER CULTURE
Ennoblement  through  degeneration.  - History  teaches  that  the branch  of a
nation that preserves  itself best is the one in which most men have,  as a
consequence of sharing  habitual  and undiscussable principles,  that is to
say  as  a  consequence  of  their  common  belief,  a  living  sense  of  community.  Here good, sound custom grows strong, here the subordination of the individual is learned and firmness imparted to character as a gift at
birth and subsequently augmented. The danger facing these strong communities founded on similarly constituted,  firm-charactered  individuals is that of the  gradually increasing inherited stupidity such as  haunts all
stability like its shadow.  It is the more unfettered, uncertain and morally
weaker individuals  upon  whom spiritual progress depends in  such  communities:  it  is  the  men  who attempt  new  things and,  in  general,  many things. Countless numbers of this kind perish on account of their weakness  without  producing  any  very  visible  effect;  but  in  general,  and especially when they leave posterity, they effect a loosening up and from
time to  time  inflict an  injury  on the stable element of a community.  It is
precisely at this injured and weakened spot that the whole body is as it
were innoculated with something new; its strength  must,  however, be as a
whole sufficient to receive this new thing into its blood and to assimilate
it. Degenerate natures are of the highest significance wherever progress
is to be effected. Every progress of the whole has to be preceded by a partial weakening.  The strongest natures preserve the type, the weaker help it  to  evolve.  - Something  similar  occurs  in  the  case  of  the  individual
human  being;  rarely  is  a  degeneration,  a  mutilation,  even  a  vice  and
physical or moral damage in general without an advantage in some other
direction. The more sickly man, for example, will if he belongs to a warlike and restless race perhaps have more inducement to  stay by himself and thereby acquire more repose and wisdom, the one-eyed will have one
stronger eye, the blind will see more deeply within themselves and in any
event possess sharper hearing. To this extent the celebrated struggle for
existence  does  not  seem  to  me  to be  the  only  theory  by  which  the  progress or strengthening of a  man or a  race can be explained.  Two things, rather,  must  come  together:  firstly  the  augmentation  of the  stabilizing
force through the  union  of minds  in belief and  communal  feeling;  then
the possibility of the attainment of higher goals through the occurrence of
degenerate  natures  and,  as  a  consequence  of them,  partial  weakenings
and injurings of the stabilizing force; it is precisely the weaker nature, as
the tenderer and more refined, that makes any progress possible at all.  A
people that becomes  somewhere weak and fragile but is as a  whole  still
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
strong and healthy is capable of absorbing the infection of the new and incorporating it to its own advantage.  In the case of the individual human being,  the task of education is to imbue him with such firmness and certainty he can no longer as a whole be in any way deflected from his path.
Then, however, the educator has to inflict injuries upon him,  or employ
the injuries inflicted on him by fate, and when he has thus come to experience pain and distress  something new and noble can be innoculated into the injured places. It will be taken up into the totality of his nature,  and
later the traces of its nobility will be perceptible in the fruits of his nature.
- So  far  as  the  state  is  concerned,  Macchiavelli  says  that  'the  form of
government  signifies  very  little,  even  though  semi-educated  people
think  otherwise.  The  great  goal  of statecraft  should  be  duration,  which
outweighs  everything  else,  inasmuch  as it  is  much  more  valuable  than
freedom.' Only when there is securely founded and guaranteed long duration  is  a  steady  evolution  and  ennobling  innoculation  at  all  possible: though  the  dangerous  companion  of all duration,  established authority,
will,  to be sure,  usually resist it.
Free spirit a relative concept. - He is called a  free  spirit who thinks differently  from what,  on  the basis  of  his  origin,  environment,  his  class  and profession, or on the basis of the dominant views of the age, would have
been expected of him. He is the exception,  the fettered spirits are the rule;
the latter reproach him that his free principles either originate in a desire
to shock  and  offend or eventuate in free actions, that is to say in actions
incompatible with sound  morals.  Occasionally it is also said that this or
that  free  principle  is  to  be  attributed  to  perversity  and  mental  overexcitation;  but  this  is merely the  voice  of malice,  which  does  not believe what  it  says  but  desires  only  to  wound:  for  the  superior  quality  and
sharpness of his  intellct is usually written on the face of the free spirit in
characters  clear  enough  even for the fettered spirit to  read.  But  the two
other derivations of free spiritedness are honestly meant;  and  many  free
spirits do in fact come  to be what they are in one or other  of these ways.
But the principles they arrive at along these paths could nonetheless be
truer and more reliable than those favoured by the fettered spirits. In the
case of the knowledge of truth the point is whether or not one possesses it,
not from what motives one sought it or along  what paths one found it.  If
the  free  spirits  are  right,  the  fettered  spirits  are  wrong,  regardless  of
whether the former have arrived at the truth by way of immorality or the
latter have  hitherto  cleaved  to  untruth out of morality.  - In  any event,
however, what characterizes the free spirit is not that his opinions are the
more correct but that he has liberated himself from tradition, whether the
outcome has been successful or a failure. As a rule, though, he will nonetheless  have truth on his  side,  or at least the spirit of inquiry after truth: he demands  reasons,  the rest demand faith.
Origin of faith. - The fettered spirit takes up his position, not for reasons,
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R  CULTURE
but out of habit; he is a Christian, for example, not because he has knowledge  of  the  various  religions  and  has  chosen  between  them;  he  is  an Englishman,  not  because  he  has  decided  in  favour  of  England:  he
encountered  Christianity  and  Englishness  and  adopted  them  without
reasons,  as  a  man  born  in  wine-producing  country  becomes  a  winedrinker.  Later,  when  he  was a  Christian and Englishman,  he  may perhaps have also devised a couple of reasons favourable to his habits; but if one refutes these reasons one does not therewith refute him in his general position. Oblige a fettered spirit to present his reasons for opposing bigamy,  for  example,  and  you  will  discover  whether  his  holy  zeal  for
monogamy rests on reasons or on acquired habit.  Acquired habituation
to spiritual principles without reasons is called faith.
Reasons judged a posteriori on the basis of consequences.  - All states  and orderings  within  society  - classes,  marriage,  education,  law  - all  these derive their force and endurance solely from the faith the fettered spirits
have in  them:  that is  to  say in the absence  of reasons,  or at least in the
warding off of the demand for reasons. The fettered spirits are unwilling
to admit this:  they recognize that it constitutes a pudendum Christianity,
which  was  very  innocent  in  its  intellectual  notions,  noticed  nothing  of
this pudendum,  demanded  faith  and nothing but faith  and  passionately
repulsed the desire for reasons; it pointed to the success enjoyed by faith:
you will soon see the advantage to be derived from faith,  it intimated,  it
shall make you blessed.  The state in fact does the same thing, and every
father raises his son in the same fashion: only regard this as true, he says,
and you will see how much good it will do you. What this means, however, is that the personal utility of an opinion is supposed to demonstrate its truth,  the advantageousness of a theory is  supposed to guarantee its
intellectual soundness and well-foundedness. It is as though a defendant
said to the court: my counsel is telling the whole truth, for just see what
follows  from what  he  says:  I  shall be  acquitted.  - Because  the  fettered
spirits harbour their principles on account of their utility,  they suppose
that the views of the free spirit are likewise held for utilitarian ends and
that he regards as true only that which profits him. Since, however, this
seems to  be  the opposite of that which is profitable  to their country or
class,  they assume that the principles of the free spirit are dangerous to
them; they say, or sense:  he must not be right,  for he is harmful to us.
The good,  strong character. - Narrowness of views,  through habit become
instinct, conducts to what is called strength of character. When someone
acts from a few but always the same motives, his actions attain to a great
degree of energy; if those actions are in accord with the principles held by
the fettered spirits they receive recognition and produce in him who does
them the sensation of the good conscience. Few motives, energetic action
and good conscience constitute what is called strength of character.  The
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
man of strong  character  lacks  knowledge  of how  many  possibilities  of
action  there  are  and  how  many  directions  it  can  take;  his  intellect  is
unfree,  fettered,  because  in  any given  case  it  presents  to  him  perhaps
only  two  possibilities;  between  these  he  must,  in  accordance  with  his
whole  nature,  necessarily  make  a  selection,  and  he  does  so  easily  and
quickly because he does not have fifty  possibilities  to  choose  from.  The
environment  in which  he  is educated  seeks to  make every man  unfree,
inasmuch as it presents to him the  smallest range of possibilities. The individual is  treated by his educators as though,  granted he  is something new,  what he  ought to become is a  repetition. If a man at first appears as
something unfamiliar,  never before existent, he is to be made into something familiar, often before existent. A child is said to have a good character when it is visibly  narrowly determined by what is already existent; by placing itself on the side of the fettered  spirits the child first proclaims its
awakening  sense  of community;  it is on  the  basis  of this  sense  of  community,  however,  that it will  later be useful to its  state  or its class.
The fettered spirits' measure of things. - Of four species of things the fettered
spirits say they are in the right. Firstly: all things that possess duration are
in  the right; secondly:  all things  that  do not inconvenience us are in the
right, thirdly: all things that bring us advantage are in the right; fourthly:
all  things  for which  we  have  made  a  sacrifice  are  in  the  right.  This last
explains  why,  for example,  a war started against the will of the nation is
carried on  with enthusiasm once sacrifices have  beeP  made.  - The  free
spirits who  urge their cause before  the  forum  of the  fettered spirits have
to demonstrate that there have always been  free spirits,  that is to say that
free  spiritedness possesses duration,  then that they do not desire to  inconvenience,  and  finally  that on the whole  they bring advantage  to the fettered  spirits;  but  because they  cannot  convince  the  fettered  spirits  of
this last it is of no use to them to have demonstrated the first and second
points.
2)0
Esprit fort.  - Compared  with  him  who  has  tradition  on  his  side  and
requires  no  reasons  for  his  actions,  the  free  spirit  is  always  weak,
especially  in actions; for he is aware  of too  many motives and points of
view and therefore possesses an uncertain and unpractised hand.  What
means are there of nonetheless rendering him relatively strong, so that he
shall  at  least  make  his  way  and  not  ineffectually perish?  How  does  the
strong spirit (esprit fort) come into being? This is in the individual case the
question how genius is produced.  Whence  comes the energy,  the inflexible  strength,  the endurance  with  which  the individual  thinks,  in opposition  to  tradition,  to  attain  to  a  wholly  individual  perception  of  the world?
2)1
The origin of genius. - The  way  in  which a  prisoner  uses  his wits in  the
1 10
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R  CULTURE
search for a means of escape, the most cold-blooded and tedious employment  of  every  little  advantage,  can  teach  us  what  instrument  nature sometimes makes use of to bring into existence genius - a word I ask to be
understood without any flavour of the mythological or religious: it takes
it and shuts it in a prison and excites in it the greatest possible desire to
free  itself.  - Or,  to  employ  a  different  image:  someone  who  has  completely lost his way in a forest but strives with uncommon energy to get out of it again sometimes discovers a new path which no one knows:  that
is how those geniuses come about who are famed for originality. - It has
already been remarked  that a  mutilation,  crippling,  a  serious deficiency
in an organ offers  the occasion for an uncommonly  successful  development of another organ, the reason being that it has to discharge not only its own  function but another as  well.  It is in this way one can suppose
many a glittering talent to have originated. - Now apply these general indications as to the origin of genius to the specific case of the origin of the perfect free spirit.
Conjecture as  to  the origin of free spiritedness. - Just as the glaciers  increase
when  in  the  equatorial  regions  the  sun  burns  down  upon  the  sea  with
greater heat than before,  so it may be that a  very strong and aggressive
free spiritedness  is evidence  that somewhere  the heat of sensibility  has
sustained an extraordinary increase.
The  voice of history.  - In  general  history  seems  to  furnish  the  following
instruction  regarding  the  production  of  genius:  mistreat  and  torment
men - thus  it  cries  to  the  passions  of envy,  hatred  and contest - drive
them to the limit,  one against the other,  nation against nation, and do it
for centuries on end; then perhaps,  a spark as it were thrown off by the
fearful energy thus ignited, the light of genius will suddenly flare up; the
will,  made wild  like a  horse under the rider's  spur,  will then break out
and  leap  over  into  another  domain.  - He  who became  aware  of  how
genius  is  produced,  and  desired  to  proceed  in  the  manner  in  which
nature  usually  does in  this matter,  would have to be exactly as evil and
ruthless as nature is. - But perhaps we have misheard.
Value of the  middle of the way.  - Perhaps  the  production  of  genius  is re-
served  to  only  a  limited  period  in  the  life  of mankind.  For one  cannot
expect of the future of mankind  that it will produce all at the same time
things which required  for  their production  quite definite conditions belonging  to  some  period  or  other  of  the  past;  we  cannot,  for  example, expect to see the astonishing effects of the religious feeling. This itself has
had its time and many very good things can never thrive again because it
was only out of it they could grow.  Thus there will never again be a life
and culture bounded by a religiously determined horizon.  Perhaps even
the type of the saint is possible only with a certain narrowness of intellect
1 1 1
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
which,  as it seems,  is now done  with  for all  future  time.  And  thus  the
high  point of intelligence  has  perhaps been  reserved  for a  single age of
mankind:  it appeared - and continues to appear, for we are still living in
this age - when an extraordinary, long accumulated energy of will exceptionally transferred itself through inheritance to spiritual goals.  This high point will be past when  that wildness and energy have ceased to be cultivated.  Perhaps  mankind  will  approach  closer  to  its  actual  goals  at  the middle  of  its  way,  in  the  mid-period  of  its  existence,  than  at  its  end.
Forces such as condition the production of art, for example, could simply
die out;  delight in lying,  in the vague,  in the symbolic, in intoxication,  in
ecstasy  could  fall  into  disrepute.  Indeed,  if life  were  ever to be ordered
within the  perfect  state,  there would  no longer  exist  in  the  present any
motive whatever for poetry and fiction, and it would be only the retarded
who still had a desire for poetical unreality. These would in any case look
back in longing to the times of the imperfect state,  of society still half barbaric,  to our times.
Genius incompatible with the ideal state.  - The Socialists  desire  to  create a
comfortable  life  for  as  many  as  possible.  If  the  enduring  homeland  of
this  comfortable  life,  the  perfect  state,  were  really  to  be  attained,  then
this comfortable life would destroy the soil out of which great intellect and
the powerful individual in general grows: by which I mean great energy.
If this state is achieved mankind would have become too feeble still to be
able  to  produce  the  genius.  Ought  one  therefore  not  to  desire  that  life
should  retain  its  violent character  and  savage  forces  and  energies  continue  to  be  called  up  again  and  again?  The  warm,  sympathizing  heart will,  of course,  desire  precisely  the abolition  of  that  savage  and  violent
character of life, and the warmest heart one can imagine would long for it
the  most passionately:  and yet precisely this  passion would nonetheless
have  derived  its  fire,  its  warmth,  indeed  its  very  existence  from  that
savage  and  violent character of life;  the  warmest  heart thus desires the
abolition of its own foundation,  the destruction of itself, which is to say it
desires something illogical,  it lacks intelligence. The highest intelligence
and  the warmest heart  cannot  coexist in the same  person,  and the sage
who  pronounces  judgement  on  life  places  himself  above  goodness  as
well and regards it only as something to be taken into account together
with everything else in the total assessment of life. The sage has to resist
these extravagant desires of unintelligent goodness,  because his concern
is the continuance of his type  and  the eventual creation of the supreme
intellect; at the least he will refrain from promoting the foundation of the
'perfect  state',  inasmuch  as  only  enfeebled  individuals  can  have  any
place in it.  Christ,  on the contrary,  whom we may think of as possessing
the warmest heart,  promoted the stupidifying of man, placed himself on
the side of the poor in spirit and retarded the production of the supreme
intellect: and in this he was consistent.  His antithesis, the perfect sage this one may  venture  to  prophesy - will just as  necessarily obstruct the 1 12
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R  CULTURE
production of a Christ. - The state is a prudent institution for the protection  of individuals  against  one  another:  if it is completed  and  perfected too far it will in the end enfeeble the individual and, indeed, dissolve him
- that  is  to  say,  thwart  the  original  purpose  of  the  state  in  the  most
thorough way possible.
2}6
The zones of culture. - One can say metaphorically that the ages of culture
correspond to the various climatic belts,  except that they are ranged one
after  the other and  not,  as in  the  case  of the geographic zones,  side by
side.  In  comparison  with  the  temperate  zone of culture into which it is
our task to pass over, that of the past produces, taken as a whole, the impression of a  tropical climate.  Violent antitheses, the abrupt transition of day to night and night to day, heat and vivid colour, reverence for everything  sudden,  mysterious,  terrible,  the  swiftness  with  which  a  storm breaks, everywhere a prodigal overflowing of the cornucopias of nature:
and, on the other hand, in our culture a bright yet not radiant sky, a clear,
more or  less unchanging air,  sharp, occasionally cold:  thus are  the  two
zones  distinguished  one  from  another.  When  we  behold  in  that  other
zone how the most raging passions are brought down and destroyed by
the  uncanny  force of metaphysical  conceptions,  we  feel  as  though  we
were witnessing the crushing of tropical  tigers in  the coils of monstrous
serpents; such events are lacking in our spiritual climate, our imagination
has been  quietened;  even  in  dreams  we  do  not experience what earlier
peoples beheld while awake. But should we not be permitted to rejoice at
this change, even allowing that the artists have  suffered badly through
the disappearance  of tropical culture and find us non-artists a little too
sober? To this extent artists are no doubt right to deny that there has been
any 'progress', for it is at least open to doubt whether the past three millennia evidence  a  course of progress  in  the  arts,  while  a  metaphysical philosopher such as Schopenhauer would likewise have no cause to recognize any progress if he surveyed the past four millennia with regard to metaphysical philosophy and religion.  - To  us,  however,  the very existence of the temperate zone of culture  counts as progress.
Renaissance and Reformation. - The Italian Renaissance contained within it
all  the  positive  forces  to  which  we  owe  modern  culture:  liberation  of
thought,  disrespect for authorities,  victory  of  education  over the  arrogance of ancestry,  enthusiasm for science and the scientific past of mankind,  unfettering  of  the  individual,  a  passion  for  truthfulness  and  an aversion to appearance and mere effect (which passion blazed forth in a
whole host of artistic characters who,  in an access of moral rectitude,  demanded  of themselves perfection in their work and  nothing  but perfection); indeed,  the Renaissance possessed positive forces which have up to now  never  reappeared  in  our  modern  culture  with  such  power as they
had then. All its blemishes and vices notwithstanding, it was the golden
age  of  this  millennium.  In  contrast  to  it  there  stands  the  German
1 1}
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
Reformation:  an  energetic  protest  by  retarded  spirits  who  had  by no
means had enough of the world-outlook of the Middle Ages and greeted
the signs of its dissolution, the extraordinary transformation of the religious
life  into  something  shallow  and  merely external,  not  with  rejoicing,  as
would have been appropriate, but with profound ill-humour.  With their
stiff-necked  northern  forcefulness  they  reversed  the  direction  in  which
men were going,  with a violence appropriate to a state of siege they compelled  the  Counter-reformation,  that  is  to  say a  Catholic Christianity of self-defence, and, just as they delayed the complete awakening and hegemony of the sciences for two or three hundred years, so they perhaps rendered  the  complete  growing-together  of the  spirit  of  antiquity  and  the modern  spirit  impossible  for  ever.  The  great  task  of  the  Renaissance
could  not be  brought  to  completion,  the  protestation  of German nature
grown  retarded  (for  in  the  Middle  Ages  it  had  had  sufficient  sense  to
cross  over  the Alps again and  again for the sake of its salvation) prevented  it.  It  was  an  extraordinary  chance  political  constellation  that  preserved  Luther  and  lent  force  to  that  protestation:  for  the  Emperor protected him so as  to employ  his innovation as an instrument of pressure against the Pope, while the Pope likewise secretely befriended him so as to employ the Protestant princes of the Holy Roman Empire as a counterweight to  the Emperor.  Without  this curious  combination of motives Luther would have been burned like Huss* - and the Enlightenment perhaps have  dawned  somewhat sooner  than it did and with a fairer lustre than we can now even imagine.
2)8
Justice towards the evolving god. - When the entire history of culture opens
up before our gaze as a confusion of evil and noble, true and false conceptions, and at the sight of this surging of the waves we come to feel almost seasick, we are then able to grasp what comfort there lies in the idea of an
evolving god: the transformations and destinies of mankind are, according
to  this  idea,  the ever increasing  self-revelation of this god,  it is not all a
blind  mechanism,  a  senseless,  purposeless confused  play of forces.  The
deification  of  becoming  is  a  metaphysical  outlook  - as  though  from  a
lighthouse down on to the sea of history - in which a generation of scholars too much given to historicizing found their consolation; one ought not to get annoyed at it,  however erroneous that idea may be.  Only he who,
like Schopenhauer, denies the fact of evolution, will likewise feel nothing
of the wretchedness of this surging of the waves of history, and because
he knows  and  feels  nothing  of that evolving god or of the  need to  suppose his existence may fairly give vent to his mockery.
Fruit  out of season.  - That better  future  which  one  wishes  for  mankind
must  necessarily be in some respects a worse future:  for it is folly to believe that a  new higher stage of mankind  will unite in itself all the excellences of earlier stages and be obliged, for example, to include the highest
•  John Huss, religious teacher condemned for heresy and burned at Constance in  1415.
1 14
TOKENS  OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R  C U LTURE
phase of art. What is the case, rather, is that every season has its own particular charm and excellencies and  excludes  those of the  other seasons.
That which grew  up out of religion  and  in proximity  to it cannot grow
again if this is destroyed; at the most, stray, late-sprouting shoots can put
in a deceptive appearance, as can brief outbreaks of recollection of the art
of former times:  a condition which  may well betray a  sense of loss and
deprivation, but which is no evidence of the existence of any force out of
which a new art could be born.
The world's  increasing severity.  - The  higher a  man's culture ascends,  the
less  space  there  is  for  humour  and  mockery.  Voltaire  was  grateful  to
heaven from his very heart for the invention of marriage and the church:
it showed how well  amusement  had been taken care of.  But he and his
age,  and  before  him  the  sixteenth  century,  mocked  these  themes  to
exhaustion;  in  these domains all witticism  is now belated and above all
too  cheap  to  attract  the  buyer's  curiosity.  Nowadays  one  asks  after
causes:  it is the age of seriousness.  Who is now interested in seeing the
differences  between  reality  and  presumptuous  appearance,  between
what a man is and what he seeks to represent, in a humorous light? The
feeling evoked by this contrast produces a quite different effect as soon as
one looks for the reasons. The more profoundly anyone understands life
the less he will give vent to mockery,  unless perhaps he comes at last to
mock at the 'profundity of his understanding' .
Genius of culture. - If anyone wanted to imagine a genius of culture, what
would the latter be like? He would manipulate falsehood, force,  the most
ruthless  self-interest  as  his  instruments  so  skilfully  he  could  only  be
called  an evil, demonic being; but his  objectives,  which here and  there
shine  through,  would  be  great  and  good.  He  would be  a  centaur,  half
beast, half man, and with angel's wings attached to his head in addition.
Miraculous  education.  - Interest  in  education  will  become  genuinely
intense only from the moment when belief in a God and his loving care is
abandoned: just as the art of medicine could begin to flourish only when
belief in miraculous cures  ceased.  To  the present day,  however,  all the
world continues to believe in miraculous education:  for the greatest disorder,  confusion  of  objectives,  unfavourable  circumstances  have  succeeded in producing the most fruitful and capable men,  and how could there not be something uncanny in that? - Soon these cases too will be examined more closely and tested more carefully:  no miracles will ever be discovered.  Under  the  same  circumstances  countless  men  continually
perish, the single individual who has been saved usually grows stronger
as a consequence because, by virtue of an inborn, indestructible strength,
he has endured these ill circumstances and in doing so exercised and augmented this strength: that is the explanation of the miracle. An education
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
that  no  longer  believes  i n  miracles  will  have  to  pay  attention  to  three
things:  firstly,  how  much  energy  is inherited(  secondly,  how  can  new
energy be ignited? thirdly, how can the individual be adapted to the enormously diversified demands of culture without being distracted by them and  his individuality dispersed - in short,  how can the individual be  set
in place within the counterpoint of private and public culture, how can he
play the main theme  and at the same time the subordinate theme as well?
The future of the physician.  - There is at present no profession capable of
being so greatly advanced as is that of the physician;  especially now that
the spiritual physicians, the so-called curers of souls,  may no longer carry
on their  sorceries  to the sound  of public approval and are avoided by all
educated people. A physician has not now attained the highest degree of
training of which he is capable when he knows the best and most recent
remedies  and  is  practised  in  applying  them,  and  can  draw  those quick
conclusions from effects to causes that make the celebrated diagnostician:
he  also  has  to  possess  an  eloquence  adapted  to  every  individual  and
calculated  to  touch  him  to  the  very  heart,  a  manliness  at  the  sight  of
which all timorousness (the wormrot that undermines all invalids)  takes
flight, a diplomat's flexibility in mediating between those who require joy
if they are to become well and those who for reasons of health must (and
can) make others joyful, the subtlety of an agent of police or an advocate
in comprehending the secrets of a soul without betraying them - in short,
a  good  physician  now  needs  the  artifices and  privileges of  all  the  other
professions; thus equipped he is then in a position to become a benefactor
to the  whole  of society  through  the augmentation of good  works,  spiritual  joy  and fruitfulness,  through  the prevention of evil thoughts, intentions,  acts  of  roguery  (whose  revolting  source  is  so  often  the  belly), through  the  production  of a  spiritual-physical  aristocracy  (as  promoter
and  preventer  of  marriages),  through  the  benevolent amputation  of all
so-called  torments  of  soul  and  pangs  of  conscience:  only  thus  will  he
cease to be a 'medicine-man' and become a saviour, to which end he will
nonetheless require no  miracles,  nor  will he  need to  have  himself crucified.
In the proximity of madness. - The sum of sensations, items of knowledge,
experiences,  the whole burden  of culture,  that is  to  say,  has become so
great that an over-excitation of the nervous and thinking powers is now a
universal  danger;  indeed,  the  cultivated  classes  of  Europe  have  in  fact
become altogether neurotic, and almost every one of its  great families has
come close to lunacy in any rate one of its branches. It is true that health is
nowadays sought by all available means; but what is chiefly needed is an
abatement of that tension of feeling, that crushing cultural burden which,
even if it has  to be  purchased  at a heavy cost,  nonetheless gives ground
for  high  hopes  of a  new Renaissance.  We  have  Christianity,  the  philosophers,  poets,  musicians  to  thank  for  an  abundance  of  profound  sen-116
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R   CULTURE
sations:  if  these  are  not  to stifle  us  we  must  conjure  up  the  spirit  of
science, which on the whole makes one somewhat colder and more sceptical and in especial cools down the fiery stream of belief in ultimate definitive truths;  it  is principally through Christianity that this stream  has grown so turbulent.
Bell-founding of culture. - Culture is fashioned as a bell is, inside a casing of
coarser,  commoner  stuff:  untruth,  violence,  unlimited  expansion  of
every individual ego,  of every individual nation,  have been this casing.
Has the time now come to remove it? Has what was molten become solid,
have the good, advantageous drives, the habits of the nobler disposition,
grown so secure and general that there is no longer any need to Jean on
metaphysics and the errors of the religions,  acts of severity and violence
are  no  longer  the  strongest  cement  binding  man  to  man  and  nation  to
nation? - There  is no longer a  god  to aid  us  in answering  this  question:
our own insight must here decide.  Man himself has to take in hand the
rule of man over the earth,  it is his 'omniscience' that has to watch over
the destiny of culture with a sharp eye in future.
The cyclops of culture. - When we behold  those deeply-furrowed hollows
in which glaciers  have lain,  we  think it  hardly  possible  that a  time will
come  when  a  wooded,  grassy  valley,  watered  by  streams,  will  spread
itself upon the same spot. So it is, too, in the history of mankind: the most
savage forces beat a path, and are mainly destructive; but their work was
nonetheless necessary, in order that later a gentler civilization might raise
its house.  The  frightful energies - those which are called evil - are  the
cyclopean architects and road-makers of humanity.
Circular orbit of humanity.  - Perhaps  the  whole  of humanity  is  no  more
than a stage in the evolution of a certain species of animal of limited duration:  so  that man has emerged from the ape and will return to the ape, while  there  will  be  no  one  present  to  take  any  sort of interest in  this
strange comic conclusion. Just as, with the decline of Roman culture and
its  principal  cause,  the spread of  Christianity,  a  general  uglification  of
man prevailed  within the Roman Empire, so an eventual decline of the
general culture of the earth could also introduce a much greater uglification and in  the end  animalization  of man  to  the  point of apelikeness.  -
Precisely because we are able to visualize this prospect we are perhaps in
a position to prevent it from occurring.
Words of consolation of a progress grown desperate. - Our age gives the impression of being an interim state; the old ways of thinking,  the old cultures are still partly with us, the new not yet secure and habitual and thus lacking in decisiveness and consistency.  It looks as though everything is
becoming chaotic,  the old becoming lost to us,  the new proving useless
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
and  growing  ever  feebler.  But  the  same  thing  is experienced  by the
soldier learning to  march:  for a  time  he  is more  insecure  and  awkward
than  ever,  because  he  is  moving  his  muscles  now  according  to  the  old
method, now according to the new, and as yet neither has carried off the
victory.  We are  faltering,  but we must not let it make  us afraid and perhaps  surrender  the  new  things  we  have  gained.  Moreover,  we  cannot return to the old, we have burned our boats; all that remains is for us to be
brave, Jet happen what  may. - Let us only go forward, let us only make a
move!  Perhaps  what we do will present the aspect of progress; but if not,
let  us  heed  the  words  of Friedrich  the  Great  and  take consolation from
them:  'Ah,  mon cher Sulzer,  vous  ne connaissez pas assez cette race maudite, a
laquelle nous appartenons.'*
Suffering from the cultural past. - He who has come  to a clear understanding of the problem of culture suffers from a feeling similar to that suffered by one  who  has inherited a  fortune dishonestly acquired  or by a prince
who reigns by virtue of an act of violence on the part of his forebears. He
thinks  with  sorrow  of  his  origins  and  is  often  ashamed,  often  sensitive
about them. The whole sum of the energy, will and joy he expends on his
property is often balanced by a profound weariness: he  cannot forget his
origins. He gazes sadly into the future:  he knows in advance that his posterity will suffer from the past as he does.
Manners.  - Good  manners  disappear in  proportion  to  the  slackening of
the  influence  of  the  court  and  of  a  closed  aristocracy:  one  can  clearly
observe this decline from  decade to decade if one keeps an eye on public
behaviour,  which is  plainly  growing  more and more plebeian. The art of
flattering  and  paying  homage  in  a  witty  and  elegant way  has been  entirely  lost;  from  this  emerges  the  ludicrous  fact  that  in  cases  where homage has to be  paid  today  (for example to  a  great statesman or artist)
people borrow the language of deep feeling, of honest, true-hearted probity - out of embarrassment and lack of wit and elegance.  Thus it is that formal  public  encounters  between  men  seem  ever  more  awkward  but
more  sincere and  honest  without,  however,  being so.  - But must  manners continue to go downhill  for ever? It seems to  me,  rather,  that manners are describing a curve and that we are approaching its nadir.  Once society  has  grown  more  certain  of its  objectives  and  principles,  so  that
they  act  constructively  (whereas  now  the  manners  we  have  acquired,
constructed as they were by circumstances that have ceased to. exist,  are
being  acquired  and  inherited  ever  more  feebly),  manners  and  deportment  in  social  intercourse  will  necessarily  be  as  natural  and  simple  as these objectives and principles  are.  An improvement in  the  division of
time and work,  gymnastic exercise transformed into an accompaniment
to leisure, a power of reflection augmented and grown more rigorous that
•  'Ah, my dear Sulzer,  you have too little understanding of this wicked race  to which we
belong.'
TOKENS  OF  H I G H E R   A N D   L O W E R   CULTURE
bestows prudence and flexibility even upon the body,  will bring all this
with it. - Here,  to be sure, one might pause to wonder whether our men
of learning, who desire to be the forerunners of this new culture,  are  in
fact  distinguished  by  the  quality  of  their  manners?  They  are  not,  of
course:  though  their  spirit  may  be  willing enough,  their  flesh  is  weak.
The past still lives too powerfully  in  their muscles: they still stand in a
constricted  posture,  and  are  half  worldly  clerics,  half  the  dependent
tutors of the nobility, and  in  addition to this crippled and enervated by
pedantry  and  antiquated  procedures.  They  are  thus,  at  any  rate  as
regards their body and often also as regards three-quarters of their mind,
still the court servants of an old, indeed senile culture, and as such themselves  senile;  the  new  spirit  that  can  occasionally  be  heard  buffeting about  in  these  ancient  containers  for  the  present  serves  only  to  make
them more fearful and insecure. Within them there walk the ghosts of the
past as well as the ghosts of the future: is it any wonder if they fail to produce the most pleasing possible impression?
Future of science.  - Science  bestows  upon  him  who  labours  and  experiments in  it much satisfaction,  upon him who learns its results  very little.
As  all  the  important  truths  of science  must gradually become  common
and everyday, however, even this little satisfaction will cease: just as we
have long since ceased to  take pleasure in learning the admirable twotimes-table.  But  if science provides us  with  less  and less  pleasure,  and deprives us of more and more pleasure through casting suspicion on the
consolations of metaphysics, religion and art,  then that mightiest source
of joy to which mankind owes almost all its humanity will become impoverished. For this reason a higher culture must give to man a double-brain, as  it  were  two  brain-ventricles,  one  for  the  perceptions  of  science,  the
other for those  of non-science:  lying  beside  one  another,  not confused
together, separable, capable of being shut off; this is a demand of health.
In one domain lies the power-source, in the other the regulator: it must be
heated  with  illusions,  onesidednesses,  passions,  the  evil  and  perilous
consequences of overheating must be obviated with the aid of the knowledge furnished by science. - If this demand of higher culture is not met, then the  future course  of human  evolution can be foretold almost with
certainty:  interest in  truth  will cease the  less  pleasure it  gives:  because
they are associated with pleasure, illusion,  error and fantasy will regain
step by  step  the  ground  they  formerly  held:  the  ruination  of science,  a
sinking  back  into  barbarism,  will  be  the  immediate  consequence;  mankind will have to begin again at the weaving of its tapestry, after having, like Penelope,  unwoven it at night.  But who can guarantee to us that it
will always find the strength for it?
Pleasure in knowledge. - Why is knowledge, the element of the scholar and
philosopher, associated with pleasure? Firstly and above all, because one
here becomes conscious of one's strength;  for the same reason,  that is to
1 19
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
say,  that  gymnastic  exercises  are  pleasurable  even  when  there  are  no
spectators.  Secondly,  because in  the  course  of acquiring knowledge one
goes  beyond  former  conceptions  and  their  advocates  and  is victor  over
them,  or at  least believes oneself to  be.  Thirdly,  because  through a new
piece  of knowledge,  however small,  we  become  superior to all and  feel
ourselves  as  the  only  ones  who  in  this  matter know  aright.  These  three
causes of pleasure are the most important,  though  there are many other
subsidiary  causes,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  man  who  acquires
knowledge.  - A  comprehensive  catalogue of these is offered,  in a place
where it would  hardly be expected,  in my parenthetic essay on Schopenhauer:*  with  this  exhibition  any  experienced  servant of knowledge can rest content,  though he may deprecate the trace of irony that seems to lie
on these pages. For if it is true that, if the scholar is to come into existence
'a  host  of  very  human  drives,  great  and  small,  have  to  be  moulded
together',  that the scholar,  though a very noble metal,  is not a pure one
and  'consists of a  tangled network of very various motives and stimuli',
the same likewise applies to the artist, the  philosopher,  the moral genius
- and whatever the great  names glorified  in  that essay are called.  Everything human deserves  to  be  viewed  ironically  so  far  as  its  origin  is  concerned: that is why  irony is so superfluous in the world.
Loyalty as proof of soundness.  - It is  sound  evidence  for  the  validity of a
theory if its originator remains  true  to it for forty years;  but  I assert  that
there  has  never yet been a  philosopher who  has not in  the  end  looked
down on the philosophy of his youth  with contempt, or at the least with
mistrust.  - Perhaps,  however,  he  has  never  spoken  publicly  of  this
change of heart,  out of a care for his reputation or - as is more likely in the
case of nobler natures - out of a  tender  regard  for his adherents.
Increasing interest. - During the course of a man's higher education everything becomes interesting to  him,  he knows how to discover the instructive side of a subject quickly and to specify the point where it will fill a gap in his thinking or an idea can be confirmed by it.  Boredom vanishes more
and  more,  as  does  excessive  excitability  of  feeling.  In  the  end  he  goes
among men  as a naturalist does among plants,  and  perceives  even himself  as a  phenomenon  that  stimulates  strongly only  his drive  to  knowledge.
Superstition in simultaneity. - Things that happen simultaneously are connected  with  one another - that  is the general opinion.  A distant  relation dies, at the same  time we dream of him - there you are!  But countless relations die without our dreaming of them.  It is as with the  shipwrecked who  take  vows:  the  votive  tablets  of those  who  perished  are  not afterwards observed in the temple. - A man dies,  an owl hoots, a clock stops,
• The third of Nietzsche's Untimely Meditations: 'Schopenhauer as educator' (1874).
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R   CULTURE
all in the same night hour:  must there not be a connection? So intimate a
relationship with nature as is assumed in this supposition is also encountered in a  more  refined form among historians and depicters of culture, who usually suffer from a kind of hydrophobia in regard to all the meaningless juxtapositions in which the life of the individual and of nations is nonetheless so rich.
Science furthers ability, not knowledge. - The value of having for a time rigorously pursued a rigorous science does not derive precisely from the results obtained from  it:  for in relation  to  the  ocean  of things  worth  knowing
these  will  be  a  mere  vanishing  droplet.  But  there  will  eventuate  an
increase in energy, in reasoning capacity, in toughness of endurance; one
will have learned how to achieve an objective by the appropriate means. To this
extent it is invaluable,  with regard to everything one will afterwards do,
once to  have been a man of science.
Youthful charm of science. - The search for truth still possesses the charm of
standing everywhere in stark contrast to grey and tedious error; but this
charm is in continual decline. Now, to be sure, we are still living in truth's
youthful era  and are accustomed to  pursue truth as  though she were a
beautiful girl; but what of that day when  she shall have become a scowling old woman? In almost every science the fundamental insight is either discovered in its earliest years or it continues to be sought; how different
a  charm  it  then  exerts  from  when  everything  essential  has  been  discovered  and only a  pitiful  late remainder is left for the  seeker to  cull  (a sensation one can experience in certain historical disciplines).
The statue of humanity. - The genius of culture does as Cellini* did when he
cast his  statue of Perseus:  the  liquefied  mass  seemed  to  be  insufficient,
but  he  was determind to  produce  enough:  so  he  threw  into  it  keys  and
plates  and  whatever  else  came  to  hand.  And  just  so  does  that  genius
throw in errors, vices, hopes, delusions and other things of baser as well
as nobler metal,  for the  statue  of humanity  must  emerge  and  be  completed;  what  does  it  matter  if  here  and  there  inferior  material  is employed?
A masculine culture. - Greek culture of the classical era is a masculine culture.  As regards women,  Pericles says it all in the funeral oration with the words:  they are at their best  when men talk about them as little as possible. - The erotic relationship of the men with the youths was, to a degree we can no longer comprehend, the sole and necessary presupposition of
all male education (somewhat in the way in which with us all higher education was for a long time introduced to women only through love-affairs and marriage); all the practical idealism of the Hellenic nature threw itself
•  Cellini: Benvenuto Cellini (15oo-7t):  Italian sculptor and  goldsmith
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
upon  this  relationship,  and  young  people  have  probably  never  since
been treated with so much attention and kindness or so completely with a
view to enhancing their best qualities (virtus) as they were in the sixth and
fifth centuries - in accordance,  that is,  with Holderlin's• fine maxim 'for
the mortal  gives of his  best when loving' . t The greater the regard paid to
this  relationship,  the  less  was  paid  to commerce  with  woman: considerations of child-begetting and sensual pleasure - that was all that counted here;  there  was  no  spiritual  commerce,  not  even  an  actual  love-affair.
When  one further  considers  that they were excluded  from contests and
spectacles of every kind, only the religious cults are left as the sole form of
higher entertainment for women. - If the figures of Electra and Antigone
were nonetheless  presented on the tragic stage,  this was endurable in art,
though in life one would not want it: just as we now could not bear in life
all the pathos we are happy enough to witness in art. - The women had
no other task than to bring forth handsome, powerful bodies in which the
character of the father lived  on as uninterruptedly as possible  and therewith to counteract the nervous over-excitation that was gaining the upper hand in so highly developed a culture. It was this that kept Greek culture
young  for  so  relatively  long a  time;  for in  the Greek mothers  the Greek
genius  again and again  returned  to nature.
The prejudice in favour of bigness. - It is plain that men overvalue everything
big  and  conspicuous.  This  originates  in  the  conscious  or  unconscious
insight that they  find  it very useful if one throws all  one's force into one
domain and makes of oneself as it were one monstrous organ.  For the individual  himself a  uniform  development  of his powers is certainly more useful  and  productive  of  happiness;  for  every  talent  is  a  vampire  that
sucks blood and strength from the other powers, and an exaggerated production can  reduce even the  most gifted man  almost  to madness.  In the arts,  too,  the  extreme  natures  attract  much  too  much  attention; but one
must also have a  much  lower culture to allow oneself to be captivated by
them.  Men  subject  themselves  from  habit  to  everything  that  wants
power.
The tyrants of the spirit. - Only where the radiance of the myth falls is the
life of the Greeks bright; elsewhere it is gloomy.  Now,  the Greek philosophers  deprived  themselves  of  precisely  this  myth:  is  it  not  as  if  they wanted  to  move  out  of the  sunshine  into  shadows  and  gloom?  But  no
plant avoids the light; fundamentally these philosophers were only seeking  a  brighter  sun,  the  myth  was  not  pure,  not  lucid  enough  for  them.
They discovered this light in their knowledge, in that which each of them
called  his  'truth'.  But  in  those days  knowledge  still  possessed  a  greater
lustre; it was  still young and as yet knew little of the perils and difficulties
of its path;  it could  still hope to reach the midpoint of being with a single
•  Friedrich Holderin  (177o-I843 ): German poet
t  From Der Tod des Empedokles,  first version,  lines 1569-7o
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R   A N D   L O W E R   CULTURE
leap and thence solve the riddle of the universe. These philosophers possessed a firm belief in themselves and their 'truth' and with it they overthrew  all  their  contemporaries  and  predecessors;  each  of  them  was  a warlike brutal tyrant. Perhaps happiness in the belief that one was in possession of the truth has never been greater in the history of the world, but nor, likewise,  has the  severity,  arrogance,  tyrannical and evil in  such a
belief. They were tyrants,  that is to say that which every Greek wanted to
be and what everyone was when he could be.  Perhaps Solon* alone constitutes  an  exception;  he  says  in  his  poems  how  he  disdained  personal tyranny.  But he did it  for love of his work,  of his lawgiving; and to be a
lawgiver  is  a  more  sublimated  form  of  tyranny.  Parmenides  also  gave
laws,  Pythagoras  and  Empedocles  probably  did  so;  Anaximander
founded a  city.t Plato was the incarnate desire  to become the supreme
philosophical lawgiver and founder of states; he appears to have suffered
terribly from the non-fulfilment of his nature,  and towards the end of his
life  his  soul  became  full  of the  blackest  gall.  The  more the power of the
Greek philosophers  declined,  the more they inwardly suffered from this
bitterness and vituperativeness; when the various sects came to the point
of battling for their truths in the open street the souls of all these wooers
of truth were totally choked with jealousy and spleen, the tyrannical element now raged as poison through their own bodies.  These many petty tyrants would have liked  to have eaten one another  raw; not a  spark of
love was left in  them,  and all too little joy in  their own knowledge.  - In
general,  the  rule  that  tyrants  are  usually  murdered  and  that  their posterity  has  but  a  brief existence  also  applies  to  the tyrants of  the  spirit.
Their history is brief and violent, their posthumous influence ceases abruptly.  Of almost all  the great Hellenes it can be  said  that  they  seem  to have come too  late:  such  is  the case with  Aeschylus,  with  Pindar,  with
Demosthenes,  with  Thucydides;  one  further generation  - and  it  is  all
over. This  is  what  is  uncanny  and  violent  about Greek history.  Nowadays, to be sure, we adhere to the gospel of the tortoise. To think historically  today  is  almost  to believe  that  at all  times  history  has  been  made according  to  the  principle:  'as  little  as possible  in  the  longest  possible
time!' Alas,  Greek history moves so fast! Life has never since been lived
so prodigally, so exorbitantly. I cannot convince myself that the history of
the Greeks pursued that natural course for which it is so celebrated. They
were  much  too  multifariously  gifted  to  have  proceeded gradually in  the
step-by-step  manner of the tortoise in  its  race  with  Achilles:  and  that  is
what is meant by natural evolution. With the Greeks everything goes quickly
forwards,  but  it likewise goes quickly downwards; the  movement of the
whole machine is so accelerated that a single stone thrown into its wheels
makes it fly to pieces.  Socrates, for example, was such a stone; in a single
night  the  evolution  of  philosophical  science,  hitherto  so  wonderfully
•  Solon (63S-558 BC): Athenian lawgiver
t  Parmenides (b.c.  510  BC),  Pythagoras (c.  582-500 BC),  Anaximander (61 1-547  BC):  pre·
Socratic philosophers.  Nietzsche discusses the pre-Socratics in his early Phi/oso,,hy ill the Traxic
Axe of the Greeks, trans.  M.  Cowan (Chicago: Gateway,  1962).
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
regular if all too  rapid,  was destroyed.  It is no idle question whether,  if
he  had  not come  under the  spell of Socrates,  Plato  might not  have  discovered an even higher type of philosophical man who is now lost to us for ever.  We  gaze  into  the  ages  that  preceded  him  as into  a  sculptor's
workshop of such types. The sixth and fifth centuries seem, however,  to
promise even more and  higher things than they actually brought forth; it
remained only a promise and proclamation. And yet there can hardly be a
more  grievous  loss  than  the  loss  of a  type,  of  a  new,  hitherto  undiscovered highest possibility of the philosophical life.  Even  the  older realized types have mostly come down to us ill-defined;  all the philosophers from
Thales  to  Democritus  seem  to  me  extraordinarily  hard  to  discern;  but
whoever succeeded in recreating these figures would move among forms
of the mightiest and purest type.  This capacity is rare, to be sure; even the
later  Greeks  who took  notice  of the  older  philosophy lacked  it;  Aristotle
especially  seems  to have  no eyes in his head whenever he  stands  before
those  we  have  named.  And  so it seems as though these  glorious philosophers had lived in vain, or as though their only function had been to prepare the way for the quarrelsome and loquacious hordes of the Socratic schools.  Here,  as  aforesaid,  there  is  a  gap,  a  breach  in  evolution;  some
great  disaster  must  have  occurred  and  the  only  statue  from  which  we
could have perceived the purpose  and  meaning of that great preparatory
exercise  in  sculpting  have  miscarried  or  been  shattered:  what  actually
happened  must  for ever  remain  a  secret of the workshop. - That which
eventuated among the Greeks - every great thinker,  in the belief that he
was the possessor of absolute truth, became a tyrant, so that in the case of
the Greeks the history of the spirit exhibits the same violent,  precipitate
and  perilous character as does their political  history - this kind of event
was  not  therewith  exhausted:  many  things  of  the  same  sort  have
occurred  right up to  the  most  recent  times,  though they have  gradually
grown rarer and can hardly occur now with the same naive clarity of conscience as they did among the philosophers of Greece.  For on the whole contradiction  and scepticism now speak too  powerfully and too  loudly.
The period of the tyrants of the spirit is past.  In the spheres of higher culture there will always have to be a sovereign authority,  to be sure - but this sovereign authority will hereafter lie in the hands of the oligarchs of the
spirit.  Their  spatial  and  political  division  notwithstanding,  they  constitute a close-knit society whose members know and recognize one another, a  thing  which  public  opinion  and  the judgements of the writers for the
popular papers may circulate as expressions of favour and disfavour. The
spiritual  superiority  which  formerly  divided  and  created  hostility  now
tends  to unite: how  could  the individual keep  himself aloft and,  against
every  current,  swim  along  his own course  through life if he did not see
here  and  there  others of his own kind  living  under  the  same conditions
and  take  them  by  the  hand,  in  struggle  against  both  the  ochlocratic
character of the half-spirited and the half-educated and the attempts that
occasionally occur to erect a  tyranny with the aid of the masses?  The oligarchs  have  need  of  one  another,  they  have  joy  in  one  another,  they 124
TOKE N S   OF  H I G H E R   A N D  L O W E R  CULTURE
understand  the  signs of one another - but each of them is nonetheless
free,  he  fights and  conquers  in  his  own  place,  and would  rather perish
than submit.
Homer. - The greatest fact in the cultivation of Greece remains that Homer
became pan-Hellenic so  early.  All the spiritual and human freedom the
Greeks attained to goes back to this fact. But it was also the actual fatality
of  Greek  cultivation,  for  Homer  by  centralizing  made  everything  level
and dissolved the more serious instincts for independence.  From time to
time a resistance to Homer arose from out of the deepest foundations of
the Hellenic; but he was always victorious. All great spiritual forces exercise beside their liberating effect also a repressive one; but it makes a difference,  to  be  sure,  whether  it  is  Homer  or  the  Bible  or  science  that tyrannizes over mankind.
26}
Talent.  - In  as  highly  developed  a  humanity  as  ours  now  is  everyone
acquires  from  nature  access  to  many  talents.  Everyone  possesses  inborn
talent, but few possess the degree of inborn and acquired toughness,  endurance and  energy  actually  to  become a  talent,  that is to  say to  become what he is: which means to discharge it in works and actions.
The gifted either over-valued or under-valued. - Men who are gifted but unscientific value every  token  of spirit, whether it is on the right track  or not;  they desire above all  that  the  man  who  has  commerce  with  them
should entertain them with his spiritual capacities, should spur them on,
inflame  them,  carry them  away  into undertakings serious and  jesting,
and in any event protect them as the mightiest amulet against boredom.
Scientific  natures,  on  the other hand,  know that the talent  for having
ideas of all kinds must be  rigorously curbed by  the spirit of science; not
that which glitters,  shines,  excites, but often insignificant seeming truth
is the fruit he wishes to shake down from the tree of knowledge. Like Aristotle,  he  may not draw a  distinction between  'boring'  and  'gifted',  his daemon  leads  him through  the  desert  as  well  as through  tropical vegetation, so that he may everywhere take pleasure only in the real, valid, genuine. - This is why insignificant scholars harbour a distrust and suspicion  of  giftedness  in  general,  and  why,  on  the  other  hand,  gifted people  frequently  harbour  an  aversion  to  science:  as  do,  for  example,
almost all artists.
Reason in school. - The school has no more important task than to teach rigorous thinking,  cautious judgement and consistent reasoning; therefore it has to avoid all those things  that are of no use for these operations, for
example religion.  For it can be sure  that,  if the bow of thought  has been
stretched too tight, human unclarity,  habit and need will afterwards relax
it  again.  But  so  long as it  exerts  influence it ought to  extort  that  which
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
distinguishes and is the essence of man: 'reason and science,  the supremest
powers  of  man'  - as  Goethe  at  least judges.  - The  great naturalist von
Baer* sees the superiority of all Europeans when compared with Asiatics
to lie in their  inculcated  ability to give reasons  for what  they believe,  an
ability the latter totally lack.  Europe has attended the school of consistent
and critical thinking, Asia still does not know how to distinguish between
truth and fiction and is unaware whether its convictions stem from observation  and  correct  thinking  or  from  fantasies.  - Reason  in  school  has made  Europe Europe: in the Middle Ages it was on the way to becoming
again  a  piece and  appendage of Asia - that is to say losing the scientific
sense  which it owed  to the Greeks.
Under-valued effect of grammar-school teaching. - The value of the grammar
school is seldom sought in the things that are actually learned and safely
brought  home  there,  but  in  those  that  are  taught  but  which  the  pupil
acquires only with  reluctance and shakes off again as quickly as he dares.
The  reading  of  the  classics  - every  educated  person  admits  this  - is,
wherever it is  carried  on,  a  monstrous  procedure: before young people
who  are  in no way whatever ripe for it,  by  teachers  whose  every word,
often whose mere appearance,  lays a blight on a good writer. But herein
lies the value  that usually goes unrecognized - that these teachers speak
the abstract language of higher culture,  ponderous and  hard to  understand
but nonetheless a  higher gymnastics for the head; that concepts,  technical terms,  methods, allusions continually occur in their language such as young  people almost never hear in the conversation of their relations or
in the street. If the pupils merely listen, their intellect will be involuntarily
prepared  for a  scientific mode of thinking.  It is not possible for them to
emerge from this discipline as a pure child of nature quite untouched by
the power of abstraction.
Learning  many  languages.  - Learning  many  languages  fills  the  memory
with  words  instead  of facts  and  ideas,  while the memory is a receptacle
which  in  the  case  of each  man  can  take  only a  certain  limited  content.
Then the learning of many languages is harmful insofar as it invites belief
that  one is in possession of complete accomplishments,  and  in  fact also
lends one a certain seductive esteem in social intercourse; it is also harmful indirectly in that it stands  in  the way of the acquisition of thorough knowledge and  any ambition  to deserve the respect of others by honest
means.  Finally,  it  is  the  axe  that  is  laid  at the  roots  of a  feeling  for  the
nuances  of  one's  own  mother tongue:  it incurably injures and  destroys
any  such  feeling.  The two  nations  which  produced  the greatest stylists,
the  Greeks  and  the  French,  learned  no  foreign  languages.  - Because,
however,  commerce between  men  is  bound  to  grow  ever more  cosmopolitan and an efficient merchant in London,  for example,  already has to make himself understood, in  speech  and writing, in eight languages, the
•  Karl Ernst von Baer (1792-1876)
TOKENS  OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R  CULTURE
learning of many languages is, to be sure, a necessary evil; but it is one for
which  mankind  will sooner or later be  compelled  to  find a  cure:  and  at
some  distant  future there will be a new language  for all - first as a commercial language,  then as the language of intellectual intercourse in general - just as surely as there will one day be air travel.  To what other end has  the  science  of  language  studied  the  laws  of  language  for  the  past
hundred years and determined what is necessary, valuable and successful in each individual language!
On  the war history of the  individual.  - In  an  individual human  life  which
passes through several cultures we find compressed together the conflict
which is otherwise played out between two generations,  between father
and son: the closeness of the relationship aggravates this conflict, because
each of the parties pitilessly draws into it the inner self of the other party
that  it knows  so  well;  and  this conflict will thus be fought most bitterly
within the  single  individual;  here each new phase will trample over the
earlier with cruel injustice and lack of understanding of its capacities and
objectives.
A quarter-of-an-hour earlier.  - Occasionally  we  discover  someone  whose
views are in advance of their time,  but only to the extent that he anticipates the  commonplace views of the next decade.  He adheres to public opinion before it is public,  that is to  say he has fallen into the arms of a
view  that  deserves  to  become  trivial  a  quarter-of-an-hour  earlier  than
others have.  His fame,  however,  usually  tends  to be  much  noisier  than
the fame of the truly great and superior.
The art of  reading.  - Every  strong  course  is onesided;  it  approaches  the
course of a straight line and like this is exclusive; that is to say, it does not
touch many other courses,  as weak parties and natures do in their wavelike swayings back and forth: one must thus forgive the philologists too for being  onesided.  Production and preservation of texts,  together with
their elucidation,  pursued  in a  guild  for centuries,  has now  finally  discovered the correct methods; the entire Middle Ages was profoundly incapable of a strict philological elucidation, that is to say of a simple ,desire to  understand  what  the  author  is  saying  - to  have  discovered  these
methods was an achievement, let no one undervalue it! It was only when
the art of correct  reading,  that is to  say philology,  arrived at its  summit
that science of any kind acquired continuity and constancy.
The art of drawing conclusions. - The  greatest advance  mankind has  made
lies in its having learned to draw correct conclusions. This is by no means
so natural an accomplishment as Schopenhauer assumes when he says:
'all are capable of drawing conclusions, few of judging'; on the contrary,
it was learned late and has even now not yet attained to dominance. The
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
drawing of false conclusions was in earlier ages the rule: and the mythologies  of  all  nations,  their  magic  and  their  superstition,  their  religious cults,  their law are inexhaustible sources of proof of this proposition.
Annual rings of individual culture. - The strengths and weaknesses of spiritual productivity depend far less on inherited talent than they do on the power of expansion bestowed with it.  Most educated young people of thirty
go back at around  this early solstice of their lives and are from then on disinclined  to  make  new  spiritual changes.  That  is  why an  ongrowing  culture at once needs for its salvation another new generation, which in its turn,  however,  does  not  get  very  far:  for  to  overtake  the  culture  of  his
father  the  son  must consume almost all  the inherited  energy  the  father
himself possessed at the  stage of life at which he begot his son; it is with
the little bit left over that he goes  past him (for,  because  the path is here
being  traversed a  second  time,  progress  is a  little  quicker;  the  son  does
not  need  to expend  quite  as much  strength  on  learning  what the  father
has  learned).  Men  possessed  of  great  power  of  expansion,  such  as
Goethe  for  example,  traverse  as  much  as  four  successive  generations
would  hardly  be able  to  equal;  for  that  reason,  however,  they advance
ahead too quickly,  so that other men overtake them only in the next century,  and  perhaps  do  not  even  completely  overtake  them,  because  the chain  of culture,  the  smooth  consistency  of  its  evolution,  is  frequently
weakened  and  interrupted.  - The  ordinary  phases  of  spiritual  culture
attained to in the course of history are overtaken more and  more speedily.  Men  at  present  begin  by  entering  the  realm  of culture as  children affected  religiously  and  these  sensations are at their liveliest in  perhaps
their tenth  year,  then  pass  over into  feebler  forms  (pantheism)  while at
the  same  time  drawing  closer to  science;  they put God,  immortality and
the like quite behind them but fall prey to the charms of a metaphysical
philosophy.  At  last  they  find  this,  too,  unbelievable;  art,  on  the  other
hand,  seems  to  promise  them  more  and  more,  so  that  for a  time  metaphysics  continues  just  to  survive  transformed  into  art  or  as a  mood  of artistic  transfiguration.  But  the  scientific  sense  grows  more  and  more
imperious  and  leads  the  man  away  to  natural  science  and  history  and
especially to the  most  rigorous  methods of acquiring knowledge,  while
art  is  accorded  an  ever  gentler  and  more  modest  significance.  All  this
nowadays usually takes place within a man's first thirty years.  It is the recapitulation  of a  curriculum  at  which  mankind  has  been  labouring  for perhaps thirty thousand years.
Retrogressed,  not retarded.  - He  who nowadays  still  commences  his evolution from religious sensations,  and perhaps after that lives for a time in metaphysics  and  art,  has  in  any  event  gone  back  quite  a  distance  and
begins  his  race  with  other  modern  men  under  unfavourable  circumstances:  he  appears  to  be  at a  disadvantage  as regards  both  space  and time.  But  because  he  has  sojourned  in  those  regions  where  heat  and
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R   A N D   L O W E R   C U LT U R E
energy are unchained and  power flows continually as a  volcanic stream
out of inexhaustible wells, provided he quits these domains at the proper
time he moves forward all the faster,  his feet have wings,  his breast has
learned to breathe more placidly, with longer and more enduring breath.
- He  went back only so  as  to have  sufficient ground for his  leap:  thus
there  can  be  even  something  fearful  and  threatening  in  this  retrogression.
A  segment of our self as artistic object. - It is a  sign  of  superior culture consciously  to  retain  certain  phases  of  development  which  lesser men  live through  almost  without  thinking  and  then wipe from the tablet of their
soul, and to draft a faithful picture of it: for this is the higher species of the
art of painting which only a few understand. To this end it will be necessary artificially to isolate those phases.  Historical studies cultivate the ability for this painting,  for they constantly challenge us, when faced with a piece of history,  of the life of a  nation or of a  man,  to  conjure  up a quite
distinct horizon of ideas, a distinct strength of sensations,  the predomination of this, the stepping-back of that. It is in this ability rapidly to reconstruct such systems of ideas and sensations on any given occasion, as for example  the  impression  of  a  temple  on  the  basis  of  a  few  pillars  and
pieces of  wall  that  chance  to  remain  standing,  that  the historical  sense
consists.  The  first result  of it is  that we comprehend our fellow men  as
being determined by  such  systems and representatives of different  cultures,  that is to  say  as  necessary,  but as alterable.  And  conversely,  that we are able to segregate parts of our own development and exhibit them
in isolation.
Cynic and  Epicurean. - The  Cynic  recognizes  the  connection  between  the
augmented  and enhanced  sufferings of the more highly cultivated  man
and the abundance of his needs; he grasps,  that is to say,  that the host of
opinions  that  exists  as  regards  the  beautiful,  appropriate,  becoming,
pleasurable must give  rise  not only  to  sources of enjoyment but also  of
repugnance.  In  accordance  with  this  insight  he  reverses  his  development,  inasmuch as he gives up many of these opinions and evades certain of the demands of culture;  he  therewith gains a  feeling of freedom and invigoration, and, once habit has rendered his mode of life endurable
to  him,  he  gradually in  fact comes  to  feel sensations of repugnance less
often  and  less  acutely  and  to  approach  the  condition  of  the  domestic
animal; in addition, however, he feels all that lies in the charm of contrast
and can in any event scold and grumble to his heart's content:  so that in
this way he again raises himself high above the world of sensations of the
animal. - The Epicurean has the same viewpoint as the Cynic; between
the two there usually exists only a difference of temperament. The Epicurean likewise employs his higher culture to make himself independent of dominating opinions; only he lifts himself above them,  while the Cynic
remains at the stage of negation.  It is as though he wanders along still,
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
sheltered, twilight pathways, while above him the tops of the trees whirl
about  in  the  wind  and  betray  to  him  how  violently  buffetted  the world
outside  is.  In the case of the Cynic,  on the other hand, it is as though he
walks abroad naked in the teeth of the wind and hardens himself to the
point of feeling nothing.
Microcosm  and  macrocosm of culture.  - The  finest  discoveries  concerning
culture are made by the individual man within himself when he finds two
heterogeneous  powers  ruling  there.  Supposing  someone is as much  in
love  with  the  plastic  arts  or  music  as  he  is  enraptured  by the  spirit  of
science and  he regards  it as impossible  to resolve this  contradiction  by
annihilating the one and giving the other free rein,  the only thing for him
to do is to turn himself into so large a hall of culture that both powers can
be  accommodated  within  it,  even  if  at  opposite  ends,  while  between
them  there  reside  mediating powers with  the  strength and  authority to
settle any contention that might break out.  Such a hall of culture within
the single individual would,  however, bear the strongest resemblance to
the cultural structure of entire epochs and provide continual instruction
regarding them by means of analogy.  For wherever grand cultural architecture  has  developed,  its  purpose  has  been  to  effect  a  harmony  and concord  between  contending  powers  through  the  agency  of  an  overwhelming assemblage of the other powers, but without the need to  suppress them or clap them in irons.
Happiness and culture. - The  sight  of the  surroundings of our childhood
moves  us deeply:  the garden-house,  the church with the graveyard,  the
pond  and  the wood - we  see all  these  with  a  sense of suffering.  We  are
seized with  pity  for ourselves,  for what  have we not gone  through  since
those days! And  here everything is still standing there so motionless and
eternal: it is only we who are so different, so affected; we even rediscover
certain people upon whom time has whetted its teeth as little as it has on
an oaktree: peasants, fishermen, forest-dwellers - they are the same. - To
be moved  and to feel self-pity in face of lower culture is a sign of a higher
culture;  from  which  it  follows  that  happiness  at any  rate  has  not been
augmented by  the latter.  He who  wants  to  harvest happiness and  contentment from life has only to avoid  acquiring a higher culture.
Parable of the dance. - Nowadays it is to be regarded as the decisive sign of
greater culture when anyone possesses sufficient strength and flexibility
to be as clear and  rigorous  in the domain of knowledge as at other times
he  is  capable  of  as  it  were  giving  poetry,  religion  and  metaphysics  a
hundred  paces  advantage  and  entering  into  their  power  and  beauty.
Such a situation between two so different demands is very hard to maintain, for science presses for the absolute dominance of its methods, and if this pressure is not relaxed there arises the other danger of a feeble vacil-1)0
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D   L O W E R  CULTURE
lation  back  and  forth  between  different  drives.  To  indicate  the  way
towards a resolution of this difficulty, however, if only by means of a parable, one might recall that the dance is not the same thing as a languid reeling back and forth between different drives.  High  culture  will resemble an audacious dance: which is, as aforesaid, why one needs a great deal of
strength and suppleness.
On  the  alleviation  of  life.  - A  principal  means  of  alleviating  one's  life  is
to  idealize  everything  that  occurs  in  it;  but  first,  however,  one  has  to
make clear to oneself from the art of painting what idealizing means. The
painter  desires  that  the  viewer  shall  not  observe  too  precisely,  too
sharply, he compels him to retreat a certain distance and view the painting from there; he is obliged to presuppose that the viewer will be some quite definite distance from the picture; he must, indeed, even assume an
equally definite degree of sharpness of eyesight in his viewer! He must be
in no way irresolute in such matters.  Everyone who wants to idealize his
life  must  therefore  not  desire  to  see  it  too  precisely,  he  must  always
banish his view of it back to a certain distance away. This artifice was understood by, for example,  Goethe.
Aggravation as alleviation and the reverse. - Much that is aggravation of life
to a certain level of mankind serves a higher level as alleviation,  because
such men have become acquainted with sterner aggravations of life.  The
reverse  likewise  occurs:  thus  religion,  for  example,  has  a  double  face,
according to whether a man gazes up to it so that it may take from him his
burdens and distress, or looks down on it as on the fetters fastened to him
so that he may not rise too high into the air.
Higher  culture  is  necessarily  misunderstood.  - He  who  has  furnished  his
instrument with only two strings - like the scholars, who apart from the
drive to knowledge have  only an acquired  religious drive - cannot understand those men who are able to play on more strings than two. It lies in the nature of higher, many-stringed culture that it should always be falsely
interpreted by the lower; as happens, for example, when art is counted a
disguised  form  of religiousness.  Indeed,  people who  are  only religious
understand even science as a seeking on the part of the religious feeling,
just as the deaf-and-dumb do not know what music is if it is not visible
movement.
Lamentation.  - It  is  perhaps  the  advantages  of our age  that  bring  with
them a decline in and occasionally an undervaluation of the vita contemplativa. * But one has to admit to oneself that our age is poor in great moralists, that Pascal, Epictetus, Seneca and Plutarcht are little read now, that
•  vita contemplativa: contemplative life
t  Pascal (1623-62), Epictetus (c.  55-135), Seneca (4 BC to AD 65),  Plutarch  (c. 46-120)
1)1
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
work and  industry - formerly  adherents of the  great  goddess  health -
sometimes seem to rage like an epidemic.  Because  time for thinking and
quietness in thinking are lacking,  one no longer ponders deviant views:
one contents oneself with hating them.  With the tremendous acceleration
of life mind and eye have become accustomed  to seeing and judging partially or inaccurately,  and  everyone is like the traveller who gets to know a  land  and  its  people  from a  railway carriage.  An independent and  cautious  attitude  towards  knowledge  is  disparaged  almost  as  a  kind  of derangement,  the  free  spirit  is  brought  into  disrepute,  especially  by
scholars,  who miss in his art of reflecting on things their own thoroughness and antlike industry and would  dearly love to banish him to a solitary corner of science:  whereas he has the quite different and higher task of commanding from a lonely position the whole militia of scientific and
learned men and showing them the paths to and goals of culture. - Such a
lament as has just been sung will probably one day have had its time and,
when the genius of meditation makes a mighty reappearance,  fall silent
of its own volition.
Principal deficiency of active men. - Active men are generally wanting in the
higher activity: I mean  that of the individual. They are active as officials,
businessmen,  scholars,  that  is  to  say  as  generic  creatures,  but  not  as
distinct individual and unique human beings; in this regard they are lazy.
- It is the  misfortune of the active  that their activity is always a little irrational.  One  ought  not  to ask  the  cash-amassing banker,  for example, what the purpose of his restless activity is: it is irrational. The active roll as
the stone rolls,  in obedience to the stupidity of the laws of mechanics.  -
As at all  times,  so now too,  men are divided into the slaves and the free;
for he  who  does  not  have  two-thirds of his  day to himself is a  slave,  let
him  be  what  he  may  otherwise:  statesman,  businessman,  official,
scholar.
In favour of the idle. - One sign that the valuation of the contemplative life
has declined is that scholars now compete with men of action in a kind of
precipitate pleasure, so that they seem to value this kind of pleasure more
highly  than  that  to  which  they  are  really  entitled  and  which  is  in  fact
much  more  pleasurable.  Scholars  are  ashamed  of  otium.*  But  there  is
something  noble  about  leisure  and  idleness.  - If  idleness  really  is  the
beginning of all vice,  then it is  at any  rate  in  the  closest proximity to  all
virtue; the idle man is always a better man than the active. - But when I
speak of leisure and idleness,  you do not think I am alluding  to you,  do
you, you sluggards? -
Modern restlessness. - Modern agitatedness grows greater the farther west
we go,  so that to the Americans the inhabitants of Europe seem one and
•  otium:  see Preface, section 8, and note
T O K E N S   OF  H I G H E R  A N D  L O W E R   CULTURE
all ease-loving and epicurean creatures, though in fact they are swarming
among one another like bees and wasps. This agitatedness is growing so
great that higher culture  can  no  longer allow its fruits to mature;  it is as
though  the  seasons  were following upon one another  too quickly. From
lack of repose our civilization is turning into a new barbarism. At no time
have the active, that is to say the restless, counted for more.  That is why
one of the  most necessary corrections  to  the  character of mankind  that
have to be taken in hand is a considerable strengthening of the contemplative  element  in  it.  Yet  even  now  every  individual  who  is  calm  and steady in  head  and  heart has the right to believe not only that he  has a
good temperament but also that he is in possession of a universally useful
virtue and  even  that,  by preserving this  virtue,  he  is  fulfilling  a  higher
task.
The extent to which the man of action is lazy.  - I  believe  that  everyone must
have his own individual opinion concerning everything about which an
opinion  is  possible,  because  he  himself  is  an  individual,  unique  thing
which adopts a  new posture towards all other things such as has never
been adopted before. But the laziness that lies in the depths of the soul of
the man of action prevents man from drawing the water up from his own
well.  - Freedom  of  opinion  is  like  health:  both  are  individual,  from
neither can a  universally valid  concept  be  set  up.  That which one individual needs for his  health  is  to  another a  cause of sickness,  and  many ways  and  means  to  freedom  of  spirit  may  to  more  highly  developed
natures count as ways and means to unfreedom.
Censor vitae.* - For a long time the inner condition of a man who wants to
exercise  his own  unfettered judgement regarding life is characterized by
the alternation of love and hate; he forgets nothing and keeps a faithful
account of all things, good and evil.  Finally, when the tablet of his soul is
wholly written over with experiences, he will not hate and despise existence, but neither will he love it: he will hover above it,  now with the eye of joy, now with that of sorrow, and, like nature itself, be now in a summery, now in an autumnal mood.
Incidental success.  - He  who  seriously  wants  to  become  free  will  at  the
same  time unconstrainedly lose  any tendency to faults and vices; he will
likewise be assailed by annoyance and ill-humour less and less often. For
his  will  will  desire  nothing  more  earnestly  than  knowledge  and  the
means to it, that is to say the enduring condition in which he is at his most
efficient in acquiring knowledge.
Value of  illness.  - The  man  who  lies  ill  in  bed  sometimes  discovers  that
what he is ill from is usually his office, his business or his society and that
•  Censor vitae: censor of life
IJJ
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
through them he has  lost all circumspection  with  regard to himself:  he
acquires this  wisdom from  the leisure to which his illness has compelled
him.
Country sensibility. - If a  man  has not  drawn firm,  restful lines along the
horizon of his life, like the lines drawn by mountain and forest,  his innermost will itself grows restless, distracted and covetous, as is the nature of the  city-dweller:  he  has  no  happiness  himself  and  bestows  none  on
others.
Prudence of free spirits. - The liberal minded, men who live for the sake of
knowledge alone,  will  find  they soon attain the external  goal of their life,
their definitive position in relation to society and the state, and will easily
be  content  with,  for  example,  a  minor  office  or  an  income  that  just
enables them to live; for they will organize their life in such a way that a
great  transformation  of external  circumstances,  even an  overturning  of
the  political  order,  does  not  overturn  their  life  with  it.  Upon  all  these
things  they  expend  as  little  energy  as  possible,  so  that  they  may  dive
down into the element of knowledge with all their accumulated strength
and as it were with a deep breath.  Thus they may hope to dive deep and
perhaps get a view of the ground at the bottom. - Of whatever happens
to him such a  spirit will want  to appropriate only the tip; he has no love
for things in their entirety,  in all the breadth and prolixity of their convolutions,  for he has no wish  to get himself entangled with them.  - He too knows  the  weekdays  of  unfreedom,  of  dependence,  of  servitude.  But
from time to time he has to have a Sunday of freedom, or he will find life
unendurable.  - It is probable  that  even  his  love  for  other  people  will be
prudent and somewhat short-breathed,  for he wants to become involved
with  the world of affection and blindness only insofar as it is necessary
for acquiring knowledge.  He must trust that the genius of justice will put
in a word on behalf of his disciple and protege if accusing voices should
call him poor in love. - There is in his way of living and thinking a refined
heroism  which  disdains  to  offer  itself  to  the  veneration  of  the  great
masses, as his coarser brother does,  and tends  to go  silently through the
world  and  out  of the world.  Whatever labyrinths he may stray through,
among  whatever  rocks  his  stream  may  make  its  tortuous  way  - if  he
emerges into  the  open  air he will  travel  his road bright,  light  and almost
soundlessly and let the sunsh;ne play down into his very depths.
Forward. - And with that, forward on the path of wisdom with a bold step
and full of confidence! However you  may be,  serve yourself as your own
source  of  experience!  Throw  off  discontent  with  your  nature,  forgive
yourself your own  ego,  for in any event you  possess in yourself a ladder
with a  hundred  rungs upon which you can climb to  knowledge. The age
in  which  with  regret  you  feel  yourself  thrown  counts  you  happy  on
T O K E N S   O F  H I G H E R   A N D   L O W E R  CULTURE
account of this good fortune; it calls to you to participate in experiences
that men of a later age will perhaps have to forgo. Do not underestimate
the  value  of having been  religious;  discover all  the  reasons by  virtue  of
which you have still had a genuine access to  art.  Can you not,  precisely
with aid of these experiences, follow with greater understanding tremendous  stretches  of  the  paths  taken  by  earlier  mankind?  Is  it  not  on  precisely  this  soil,  which  you  sometimes  find  so  displeasing,  the  soil  of unclear thinking,  that many of the most splendid fruits of more  ancient
cultures grew up? One must have loved religion and art like mother and
nurse - otherwise  one  cannot  grow  wise.  But  one  must  be  able  to  see
beyond them,  outgrow them;  if one remains under their spell,  one does
not  understand  them.  You  must  likewise  be  on  familiar  terms  with
history and with playing the cautious game with the scales 'on one hand
- on the other hand'. Turn back and trace the footsteps of mankind as it
made its great sorrowful way through the desert of the past: thus you will
learn  in  the  surest  way  whither  all  later  mankind  can  and  may  not  go
again.  And by your desiring with all your strength to see ahead how the
knot of the future is going to be tied, your own life will acquire the value
of an instrument and means of knowledge. You have it in your hands to
achieve the absorption of all you experience - your experiments,  errors,
faults,  delusions,  passions,  your  love  and  your  hope  - into  your  goal
without remainder.  This goal is  yourself to become a necessary chain of
rings  of  culture  and  from  this  necessity  to  recognize  the  necessity
inherent in  the course of culture in general.  When your gaze has become
strong enough  to  see  to  the  bottom of the  dark well of your nature and
your knowledge,  perhaps  you  will  also  behold  in  its  mirror  the  distant
constellations of future cultures.  Do you believe that such a life with such
a  goal  is  too  laborious,  too  much  lacking  in  everything  pleasant?  Then
you  have  not  yet  learned  that  no  honey  is sweeter  than  that of knowledge,  or  that the clouds of affliction  hovering over you  will  yet  have  to serve you as udders from which you will milk the milk for your refreshment.  Only when  you  grow  old  will  you come  to realize how you have given ear to the voice of nature,  that nature which rules the whole world
through joy:  the same life that has its apex in  old age also has its apex in
wisdom,  in that gentle sunshine of a  constant  spiritual joyousness; both
of them,  old age and wisdom,  you will  encounter on the same mountain
ridge of life: so did nature will it. Then it is time, and no cause for anger,
that  the  mists  of death  should  approach.  Towards  the  light - your  last
motion; a joyful shout of knowledge - your last sound.
1)5
MAN
IN
SOCIETY
Benevolent dissimulation. - When  trafficking with  men  we often  need  to
practise  a  benevolent dissimulation;  we  have  to  pretend  we  do  not  see
through the motives of their actions.
Copies. - We quite often encounter copies  of significant men; and, as also
in the case of paintings,  most people prefer the copies to the originals.
The speaker. - One can speak very much to the purpose and yet in such a
way that all  the world  cries out the opposite:  that  happens  when one is
not speaking to all the world.
Lack of confidence. - Lack of confidence among friends is a fault that cannot
be reprimanded without becoming incurable.
On the art of giving. - To be obliged to decline a gift simply because it was
not offered in the proper way incenses one against the giver.
298 .
Tlze most dangerous party member. - In every party there is one who through
his all too credulous avowal of the party's principles incites the others to
apostasy.
Adviser of an  invalid.  - He  who offers  his advice to  an  invalid  acquires a
feeling  of superiority over  him,  whether  his advice is accepted  or rejected.  That  is  why  proud  and  sensitive  invalids  hate  advisers  even  more than they do  their illness.
)00
Two kinds of equality. - The thirst for equality can express itself either as a
desire  to  draw  everyone  down  to  oneself  (through  diminishing  them,
spying on them,  tripping  them up) or to raise oneself and everyone else
up  (through  recognizing  their  virtues,  helping  them,  rejoicing  in  their
success).
)01
Against embarrassment. - The best means  of coming to the aid of people
M A N   IN  SOC IETY
who suffer greatly from embarrassment and of calming them down is to
single them out for  praise.
Preference for specific virtues . - We do not  place  especial value on  the possession of a virtue until we notice its total absence in our opponent.
Why we contradict.  - We  often  contradict  an opinion  for  no other  reason
than that we do not like the tone in which it is expressed.
Trust and intimacy.  - He  who  deliberately  seeks  to  establish  an  intimacy
with another person  is  usually  in  doubt as  to  whether he  possesses  his
trust.  He who is sure he is trusted sets little value on intimacy.
Equilibrium of friendship. - Sometimes in our relations with another person
the right equilibrium of friendship is restored when we place in our own
balance of the scales a few  grains of injustice.
The most dangerous physicians. - The most dangerous physicians are those
who, as born actors, employ a perfect art of deception to imitate the born
physician.
When paradoxes are in order. - One sometimes  needs witty people  so as to
win them over to a proposition so that they may exhibit it only in the form
of a tremendous paradox.
)o8
How brave people are won over.  - One can persuade brave people to participate in an action by representing it as being more  dangerous  than it is.
Civilities. - Acts of civility towards us by people we do not like we account
offences on their part.
Keeping  waiting.  - A  sure  means  of  irritating  people  and  putting  evil
thoughts into  their  heads  is  to  keep  them  waiting  a  long  time.  To  have
this happen makes one immoral.
31 1
Against the trusting. - People who give u s  their complete trust believe they
have thus acquired a right to ours. This is a false conclusion; gifts procure
no rights.
Means of compensation. - When we have done a person harm, it often provides him with sufficient satisfaction - makes him, indeed, well disposed 137
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
towards us - if we offer him an opportunity to  make us the subject of a
witticism.
Vanity of the tongue. - Whether a man conceals his bad qualities and vices
or openly  admits them,  in both cases  his  vanity is seeking its advantage:
one has only to observe how subtly he distinguishes before whom he conceals these qualities,  before whom he is honest and open-hearted.
Considerate.  - To  desire  to offend  no one and injure no one  can be the
mark of a just disposition as well as of a timorous one.
Requisite for disputing. - He who does not know how to put his thoughts
on ice ought not to enter into the heat of battle.
Society and arrogance. - One unlearns arrogance when one knows one  is
always  among  deserving  people;  being  alone  implants  presumptuousness.  Young people are arrogant, for they live in the society of their own kind,  who are all  nothing but like to seem much.
Motive of attack.  - One attacks  someone  not only so as to harm him or to
overpower him but  perhaps only  so as to  learn  how strong he is.
Flattery.  - Persons who wish to deaden  our  caution  when  we  associate
with them by flattering us are employing a dangerous expedient: it is like
a  sleeping-draught  which,  if  it  does  not  put  us  to  sleep,  only  keeps  us
more wakeful.
Good letter-writers. - He who does not write books,  thinks a great deal and
lives in inadequate company  will usually be a good letter-writer.
The ugliest. - It is to be doubted whether a traveller will find anywhere in
the world  regions uglier than the human face.
Sympathizers.  - Natures  full  of sympathy  and  always ready to  assist  in
misfortune are rarely at the same time  willing  to  join  in  rejoicing:  when
others  are  fortunate  they  have nothing  to do,  are superfluous,  feel  they
have lost their position of superiority and  thus can easily exhibit displeasure.
A suicide's relatives. - The relatives of a suicide hold it against him that out
of regard for their reputation he did not remain alive.
M A N   IN  S O C I E T Y
Ingratitude to be expected. - He who bestows  something great receives no
gratitude; for the recipient is already overburdened by the act of taking.
In company lacking esprit. - No one is grateful for the politeness the man of
esprit exhibits when he accommodates himself to a company in which it is
not polite to exhibit esprit.
Presence of witnesses.  - One is  twice as glad  to  leap after a man who  has
fallen into the water when there are people  present who dare not do so.
Silence. - The  way  of replying to a polemical attack the most unpleasant
for both  parties is to get annoyed and stay silent: for the attacker usually
interprets the silence as a sign of contempt.
A friend's secret. - There will be few who,  when they are in want of matter
for conversation,  do not reveal the more secret affairs of their friends.
Humanity.  - The  humanity  of  celebrities  of  the  spirit  when  they  traffic
with  those  who  are  not  celebrated  consists  in  being courteously  in  the
wrong.
Tlze embarrassed. - People who do not  feel  secure in society employ every
opportunity afforded by  the presence of someone to whom  they are superior  of publicly  exhibiting  this  superiority  at  his  expense  before  the company, for example by  teasing.
Obligation. - It oppresses a refined  soul  to know that anyone  is  under an
obligation,  a coarse one to be  under an obligation to anyone.
Sign  of estrangement.  - The  most  obvious  token  of an  estrangement  of
views  between  two  men  is  that  both  inject  a  certain  irony  into  their
remarks but neither feels the irony of it.
Arrogance of the meritorious. - Arrogance on the part of the meritorious  is
even more offensive to us than the arrogance of those without merit: for
merit itself is offensive.
The danger in our own voice. - Sometimes in the course of conversation the
sound of our own voice disconcerts us and misleads us into making assertions which in no way correspond to our opinions.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
In conversation. - Whether in conversation one generally acknowledges or
denies that another is in the right is altogether a matter of what one is accustomed to: both make good sense.
Fear of one's neighbour. - We fear the hostility of our neighbour because we
are apprehensive that through such a  mood he will get to know our private secrets.
To distinguish through  reprimanding. - Very prominent persons  apportion
even  their reprimands as  though  they were  distinguishing us by  them.
The warmth with which they concern themselves with us ought to put us
on our guard. We completely misunderstand them if we take their reprimands  objectively  and  defend  ourselves  against  them;  we  annoy  them and estrange them from us if we do so.
Vexation at another's goodwill. - We are mistaken as to the degree to which
we believe ourselves  hated  or  feared:  we ourselves  may know very well
the degree to which we differ from a  person,  tendency,  party, but others
know us only very superficially and  therefore hate us only superficially.
We often  encounter goodwill that we find inexplicable; when we understand it,  however, it offends us,  because it shows we are not being taken with sufficient seriousness.
Clashing  vanities.  - When  two  people  who  are  equally  vain  meet  they
afterwards retain a poor impression of one another,  because each was so
much concerned with the impression he wished to make on the other that
the  other  made  no  impression  on  him;  both  eventually  come  to  realize
their efforts are in vain,  and each  puts  the blame on the other.
Bad manners as a good sign . - The superior spirit takes pleasure in the acts
of tactlessness,  arrogance,  even hostility perpetrated against him by ambitious  youths;  they are the bad manners of fiery steeds who have as yet carried no rider and  yet will before long be so proud to carry one.
When it is advisable to be in the wrong. - We do well to tolerate accusations
against us without  refuting them even when we are  wronged by  them,
when it is the case that our accuser would consider us even more in the
wrong if we contradicted him,  let alone refuted him.  It is true, of course,
that in this way a man can be always in the wrong and always appear to
be in the right,  and in the end  become  with the clearest conscience in the
world the most unendurable tyrant and bore;  and  what applies to the individual can also apply to entire classes of society.
M A N   I N  S O C I ETY
Too  little honoured.  - Very conceited  people who have received less  consideration than  they  expected  to  receive  try  hard to  mislead  themselves and  others  on  the  matter  and  become  ingenious  psychologists  in  their
efforts to  make out  that they  have in  fact been sufficiently honoured:  if
they fail  to  obtain  their  objective,  if  the  veil  of deception is  rent,  they
abandon themselves to all the greater ill-humour.
Echoes of primal  conditions  in  speech.  - In  the  way  in  which  men  now
advance  assertions  in  society  one  often  recognizes an  echo  of the  ages
when they knew how to handle weapons better than they knew anything
else: they wield their assertions like marksmen taking aim, or we seem to
hear the ringing and whistling of blades; and with some men an assertion
comes battering  down like  a  club. - Women,  on  the  other hand,  speak
like creatures who have for millennia sat at the loom, or plied the needle,
or been childish with children.
The  narrator.  - He  who  narrates  something  soon reveals whether  he  is
doing  so  because  the subject  interests  him  or  whether by doing so  he
hopes  to  arouse  interest.  In  the  latter  case  he  will  exaggerate,  employ
superlatives and the like.  He will then usually narrate badly, because he
is thinking not so much of the subject as of himself.
The reciter. - He who recites dramatic poems in public makes discoveries
about his character: he finds that his voice is more naturally suited to certain moods and scenes, for example to pathos or scurrility, while perhaps in everyday life he had simply had no opportunity of exhibiting pathos or
scurrility.
A scene of comedy that happens in rea/ life. - Someone devises a witty opinion
on a subject in order to utter it in social company.  Now, in a comedy we
would listen to  him and see how he would try to sail full ahead and to
transport the company  to  the point at which he  can make his  remark:
how he continually nudges the conversation towards one goal, occasionally loses  his direction,  recovers it,  at  last attains  the vital  moment:  his breath almost fails him - and then someone else in the company takes the
remark out of his mouth. What will he do? Oppose his own opinion?
Involuntarily  impolite.  - If  someone  involuntarily  treats  another  impolitely, for example fails to greet him because he does not recognize him, he is vexed by the fact, even though he is unable to reproach himself for it;
he grieves at the ill-opinion of him he has aroused in the other, or he fears
the consequences of any discord that may follow, or it pains him to have
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
offended  the other - vanity,  fear or pity  can be set in motion,  that is to
say,  and  perhaps all of them  together.
Betrayer's  masterpiece.  - To  express  to  a  fellow conspirator the  grievous
suspicion  that  one is  going  to  be  betrayed  by  him,  and  to  do so  at  precisely the moment one is oneself engaged in betrayal, is a masterpiece of malice,  because  it  keeps  the  other  occupied  with  himself and  compels
him for a time to behave very openly and unsuspiciously, thus giving the
actual  betrayer full freedom of action.
To offend and to be offended. - It is much more  pleasant to offend and later
ask forgiveness than to be offended and forgive. He who does the former
gives a token of power and afterwards of quality of character. The latter,
if he does not wish to be thought inhumane, has to forgive; pleasure in the
humbling of the other  is,  on account  of this constraint,  slight.
In a disputation. - When one contradicts another opinion and at the same
time  develops  one's own,  continual  consideration  of that other opinion
usually disturbs the natural  posture of one's  own:  it appears  more deliberate,  more rigorous, perhaps a little exaggerated.
Artifice. - He who wants to demand something hard of another must not
conceive the matter as any kind of problem but simply present his plan as
though it were the only possibility; if objection or contradiction begin to
dawn in the eye of his opponent, he must know how to break off quickly
and  allow him no time to develop them.
Pangs of conscience after social gatherings. - Why after the usual sort of social
gatherings  do  we  suffer  from  pangs  of  conscience?  Because  we  have
taken  important  things  lightly,  because  in  discussing  people  we  have
spoken without complete loyalty or because we have kept silent when we
should  have  spoken,  because  occasionally  we  have  not  leaped  up  and
run off,  in  short  because  we  have behaved  in society as though we  belonged to it.
One is judged falsely. - Whoever listens to how he is being judged is always
vexed. For even those who stand  closest  to us ('know us best')  judge  us
falsely. Even good friends sometimes give vent to their ill-feeling in an illjudged word; and would they be our friends if they knew us well? - The judgements of those who  are  indifferent to us are very  painful,  because
they  sound  so unprejudiced  and  almost  objective.  But if we  notice  that
someone who is hostile to us knows us on some point we have kept secret
as well as we know it ourselves, how great is our chagrin then!
M A N   I N   S O C I ETY
Tyranny of the portrait. - Artists and statesmen who speedily put together
a complete picture of a man or an event out of a few individual traits are
usually unjust inasmuch as they afterwards demand that the event or the
man  must  actually  be  as  they  have  painted  it  or  him;  they  demand,  in
fact,  that one shall be as talented, as cunning, as unjust as one is in their
representation.
The relative as the best friend. - The Greeks, who knew so well what a friend
is - of all peoples they alone often and repeatedly ventilated the subject of
friendship,  so  that  they  were the first,  and  so  far the last,  to  whom the
friend has appeared a problem worth solving - these same Greeks designated  relatives  by  an  expression  which  is  the  superlative  of  the  word
'friend' .  I find this inexplicable.
Misunderstood honesty.  - When  in conversation someone  quotes  himself
('as I said then',  'as I usually say'),  this gives an impression of presumptuousness,  whereas  it often arises from the  opposite  source,  or at least from honesty,  which  does  not wish  to deck and embellish the moment
with ideas that rightly belong to an earlier one.
The parasite. - It indicates a  complete lack of nobility of disposition when
someone prefers to live in dependency,  at the expense of others,  merely
so as not  to  have  to  work  and  usually  with  a  secret animosity  towards
those  he  is  dependent  on.  - Such  a  disposition  is  much  more frequent
among women than among men, also much more excusable (for historical reasons).
On  the altar of reconciliation. - There are circumstances  under  which  one
can obtain something from a man by offending and falling out with him:
the feeling of having an enemy so torments him that he employs the first
sign of a  softening of hostility to effect a reconciliation and sacrifices on
the altar of this reconciliation that thing on which he at first set such store
he refused to relinquish it at any price.
Demanding pity as a sign of presumption. - There are people who, when they
fly into a rage and offend others,  demand firstly that it should not be held
against them, and secondly that they should be pitied for being subject to
such violent paroxysms.  Such  is the extent of human presumption.
Bait. - 'Everyone has his price' - this is not true.  But there surely exists for
everyone  a  bait  he  cannot  help  taking.  Thus  to  win  many  people  over
to a  cause one needs only to put on it a  gloss of philanthropy,  nobility,
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
charitableness,  self-sacrifice - and on to what cause can one not put it?-:
these are the sweetmeats and dainties for their soul; others have others.
)60
Attitude towards praise. - When  good  friends praise a  talented nature  he
will often exhibit pleasure at  it,  though he does so out of politeness and
benevolence: in truth he is indifferent to it.  His real being is quite languid
in its presence and it cannot drag him a single step out of the sunshine or
shadow in which he lies; but men want to give pleasure when they praise
and one would  grieve them if one did not rejoice at their praise.
)61
The experience of Socrates.  - If one has become a  master in one thing one
usually  for  that  very  reason  remains  a  complete bungler in  most  other
things; but one  thinks  precisely the  opposite,  a fact experienced already
by Socrates. This is the drawback that makes association with masters unpleasant.
)62
Means of brutalizing.  - To  fight against  stupidity  in  the  long  run  makes
even the fairest and gentlest men brutal.  Perhaps this means they are on
the right path to  their  own  self-defence,  for the just argument against a
stupid head is a  clenched  fist.  But because,  as aforesaid,  they are gentle
and  fair  of  character,  the  suffering  they  inflict  on  others  through  this
means  of defence is less than the suffering they inflict on themselves.
)6)
Curiosity. - If there were no curiosity little  would be done to further the
wellbeing of one's neighbour.  But  curiosity creeps  into the house of the
unfortunate  and  needy  under the  name  of duty  or pity. - Perhaps  even
much lauded mother-love contains a goodly  portion of curiosity.
)6�
Miscalculation  in society. - This one wishes to arouse interest through his
j udgements,  that  through  his  inclinations  and  disinclinations,  a  third
through  his acquaintanceships, a fourth through his isolation - and they
all miscalculate.  For he before whom the spectacle is enacted himself believes he is the only spectacle that comes into consideration.
)65
Duel. - In favour of all affairs of honour  and  duels  it can be  said that,  if
someone has so susceptible a  sensibility that he cannot endure to live if
this or that person says or thinks this or that  about him, he has a right to
make the matter an issue of life or death for one or the other. That he is in
fact so susceptible must be considered outside the domain of dispute: it is
part of our inheritance from the past,  whose greatness could never have
existed without its excesses. If, however, there has been created a code of
honour  which  admits blood  in place  of death,  so  that the heart is lightened after a  duel  fought according to rules,  this is a great blessing,  since otherwise  many human lives would be placed in danger. - Such an insti-144
M A N   IN  S O C I ETY
tution,  moreover,  educates men into being cautious about what they say
and makes it possible to associate with them.
)66
Nobility and gratitude. - A  noble soul will be glad to feel obligated to  gratitude  and  will  not  anxiously  avoid  those  occasions  on  which  such  obligation  arises;  it  will  likewise  also  subsequently  be  composed  in  the expression of gratitude; whereas baser souls resist all becoming obligated
or are  afterwards  excessive  and  all  too  sedulous  in  their expressions  of
gratitude.  The latter is also to be found in people of baser origin or lowly
position: a favour shown to them seems to them a miracle of grace.
)67
Hours of eloquence. - In order to speak well,  one man needs someone who
is decidedly and recognizedly his superior,  another can find full freedom
of eloquence and  happy  turns  of phrase  only before  someone  he excels:
the reason is the same in both cases; each of them speaks well only when
he speaks sans gene, • the one because before the more elevated person he
feels no urge to contest and competition,  the other likewise in face of the
person more  lowly.  - Now,  there exists a quite different species of men
who  speak well  only  when  they  speak  in  contest with  the  intention  of
winning.  Which  of  these  two  species  is  the  more  ambitious:  he  who
speaks  well  out  of  thirst  for  honour  or  he  who,  if he  speaks  with  that
motive in view,  speaks badly or not at all?
}68
The  talent for friendship.  - Among  men  who possess a  particular gift  for
friendship two  types  predominate.  One is in a  state of continual ascent
and  for each  phase  of  his  development  finds  a  friend precisely  appropriate to it. The succession of friends he acquires in this way are seldom at one with one another and sometimes in dissonance and discord: which is
quite in accord with the fact that the later phases of his development abolish  or  infringe  upon  the  earlier.  Such  a  man  may  be  jocularly  called  a ladder.  - The  other  type is  represented  by him who exercises an attraction on very various characters and talents, so that he gains a whole circle of  friends;  they,  however,  establish  friendly  relations  between  one
another,  their  differences  notwithstanding,  on  account  of  being  his
friend.  One can call such a man a circle: for in him this solidarity between
such different natures and dispositions must in some way be prefigured.
- For the rest,  the gift of  having  good  friends  is  in  many  men  much
greater than the gift of being a good friend.
)69
Tactics  in  conversation.  - After  a  conversation  with  anyone  one  is  best
placed to speak of the  partner in the conversation if one has had the opportunity  of displaying  one's  wit  and  amiability before  him  in all  their splendour.  It is a  tactic  that has been employed by  shrewd  people who
wanted to prejudice someone in their favour and did so by offering him
•  sans gene: without shame or inhibition
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
the opportunity for a good witticism and the like.  A merry conversation
could  be  imagined  between  two  very  shrewd  people  each  of  whom
wanted to prejudice the other in his favour and to this end tossed the fairest opportunities back and forth while neither accepted them: so that the conversation  would  be  on  the  whole  unwitty  and  unamiable  because
each assigned  the opportunity for wit and amiability to the  other.
Discharge of ill-humour. - The  man  who experiences failure prefers to attribute  this  failure  to  the  ill-will  of another  rather  than  to  chance.  His incensed feelings are relieved if he imagines a person, and not a thing, to
be  the cause of his  failure; for one can  revenge  oneself on people,  while
the  iniquities of chance  must be  swallowed down.  That  is  why,  when  a
prince  experiences  a  failure,  his  attendance  is  accustomed  to  point out
one sole man as the supposed cause and to sacrifice him in the interest of
the  whole  court;  for,  since  he  can  take  no  revenge  on  the  goddess  of
destiny  herself,  the  prince's  displeasure  would  otherwise  be  visited on
them  all.
Receiving the colour of the environment. � Why are inclination and aversion
so contagious that it is hard  to live in the proximity of a person of strong
feelings  without  being  filled  like  a  barrel  with  his  For  and  Against?
Firstly, it is very hard for us wholly to refrain from exercising judgement;
sometimes, indeed,  our vanity finds it altogether unendurable to do so; it
here wears the same colours as poverty of thought and feeling or timidity
and unmanliness: and thus we are at last impelled to take sides,  perhaps
against the tendency of our environment if this posture is more satisfying
to our pride. Usually, however - this is the second point - our transition
from  indifference  to  inclination  or aversion  is in  no  way conscious;  we
gradually  accustom  ourself  to  the  sensibility  of our  environment,  and
because  sympathetic  agreement  and  accommodation  is  so  pleasant  we
soon bear all the marks and party  colours of this environment.
Irony. - Irony is in place only as a pedagogic tool, employed by a teacher
in  dealing  with  any  kind  of  pupil:  its  objective  is  humiliation,  making
ashamed,  but of that salutary sort which  awakens good resolutions and
inspires respect and gratitude towards him who treats us thus of the kind
we feel for a physician.  The  ironist  poses as unknowing,  and does so so
well  that  the pupils  in discussion  with  him are  deceived,  grow  bold  in
their  belief they know  better and expose  themselves  in every way; they
abandon: circumspection and  reveal  themselves  as they are - up to  the
moment  when  the  lamp  they  have  been  holding  up  to  the  face  of the
teacher sends its beams very humiliatingly back on to them themselves. -
Where  such  a  relationship as  that  between  teacher  and  pupil  does  not
obtain,  irony  is  ill-breeding,  a  vulgar  affectation.  All  ironical  writers
depend  on  the  foolish  species  of  men  who  together  with  the  author
would  like to feel  themselves  superior  to all others and who regard  the
M A N   I N   SOCI ETY
author as the  mouthpiece of their presumption.  - Habituation to irony,
moreover,  like  habituation  to  sarcasm,  spoils  the  character,  to  which  it
gradually lends the quality of a malicious and jeering superiority:  in the
end  one  comes  to resemble a  snapping  dog which has learned  how  to
laugh but forgotten how to bite.
Presumptuousness. - One should guard against nothing more than against
the  efflorescence  of  that  weed  which  is  called  presumptuousness  and
which ruins in us every good harvest, for there is a presumptuousness in
cordiality,  in respectfulness, in benevolent familiarity, in endearment, in
friendly advice,  in the admission of error, in sympathy for others,  and all
these fair things excite aversion when that weed  flourishes  among them.
The presumptuous person, that is to say the person who wants to signify
more than he is or counts for, always makes a false calculation.  He enjoys a
momentary success,  it is true, inasmuch as the people before whom he is
presumptuous  usually  mete  out  to  him  the  measure  of  respect  he
demands, out of fear or because it is the easiest thing to do; but they take
a vile revenge for it, inasmuch as they subtract the excess measure he has
demanded from  the value they previously accorded him. There is nothing for which men  demand  higher payment  than  humiliation.  The presumptuous person can make his actual merits, which may be great, seem so  suspect and  small in the eyes of others  that they are  trampled in the
dust. - One should permit oneself even a proud  demeanour only where
one can be quite sure one will not be misunderstood and regarded as presumptuous,  for example in the presence of friends and wives.  For in traffic  with  men  there  is  no  greater  folly  than  to  acquire  a  reputation  for presumptuousness;  it  is  worse  than  having  failed  to  learn  how  to  tell
polite lies.
Dialogue. - The dialogue is the perfect conversation, because everything
one of the parties says acquires its particular colour, its sound,  its accompanying gestures strictly with reference to the other to whom he is speaking, and  thus resembles a  correspondence in  which the forms of expression
vary according to  whom the correspondent is writing  to.  In  a  dialogue
there is  only a  single refraction of the thought:  this  is  produced by  the
partner  in  the  dialogue,  as  the  mirror  in  which  we  desire  to  see  our
thoughts reflected as perfectly as possible.  But what happens when there
are two,  three or more fellow participants? The conversation  necessarily
loses its subtle individuality,  different intentions clash with  and disrupt
one another; a turn of phrase that appeals to one offends the disposition
of another. That is why in converse with several people one will be compelled to  draw back into oneself,  to present the facts as they are  but  to deduct from  the subjects of converse  that  opalescent  ether  of humanity
that makes of a conversation one of the pleasantest things in the world.
One has only to listen to the tone men tend to adopt when speaking to
whole groups of men; it is as though the fundamental note of all speech
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
were:  'this is what I am,  this is what I say,  you can make of it what you
will!' This  is  the  reason  intelligent  women  usually  leave behind on  him
who has encountered  them  in society an alienating,  painful,  forbidding
impression: it is speaking to many, before many,  that robs her of all intellectual amiability and throws a harsh light only on her conscious concern with herself,  her tactics  and her objective of a public victory: whereas the
same  women  become  female  again  and  rediscover  their  intellectual
charm in a  dialogue  for two.
Posthumous fame. - To hope for the recognition of a  distant future makes
sense  if  one  assumes  that  mankind  will  remain  essentially  unchanged
and  that all greatness is bound  to be felt as great not only in a single age
but  in  all  ages.  This,  however,  is  an  error;  mankind  undergoes  great
transformations  in  its  feeling  for  and  judgement  of  what  is  good  and
beautiful; it is fantasizing to believe of oneself that one is a mile further on
in  advance  and  that all  mankind  is  going  along our  road.  In  addition:  a
scholar who fails to gain recognition  may be quite sure that his discovery
will also be made by others and that at the best some future historian will
acknowledge that he already knew this or that but was not able to obtain
general  acquiescence  in  the  matter.  Failure  to  gain  recognition  will
always  be  interpreted  by  posterity  as  lack  of  vigour.  - In  short,  one
should  not  be  too  ready  to  speak  up  for  proud  isolation.  There  are  of
course exceptions; but as a rule it is our faults, weaknesses and follies that
hinder recognition of our  great qualities.
Of friends. - Only reflect to yourself how various are the feelings, how divided the opinions, even among your closest acquaintances, how even the same  opinions  are  of a  quite  different rank  or  intensity  in  the  heads  of
your friends than  they are in yours; how  manifold are  the occasions for
misunderstanding,  for  hostility and  rupture.  After reflecting on  all  this
you  must tell yourself:  how  uncertain  is the ground  upon which all our
alliances  and  friendships  rest,  how close at hand are icy  downpours  or
stormy  weather,  how isolated each man is!  When one  realizes this,  and
realizes in addition that all the opinions of one's fellow men, of whatever
kind  they  are  and  with  whatever  intensity  they  are  held,  are  just  as
necessary and unaccountable as their actions; if one comes to understand
this inner necessity of opinions originating in the inextricable interweaving of character, occupation, talent, environment - perhaps one will then get free  of that  bitterness of feeling  with  which  the  sage  cried:  'Friends,
there  are  no  friends!'  One  will,  rather,  avow  to  oneself:  yes,  there are
friends,  but it is error and deception regarding yourself that led them to
you;  and they  must  have learned how to keep silent in order to  remain
your  friend;  for  such  human relationships almost always  depend  upon
the  fact  that  two  or  three  things  are  never  said  or  even  so  much  as
touched upon: if these little boulders do start to roll, however, friendship
follows after them and shatters. Are there not people who would be mort-
M A N   I N   SOCIETY
ally wounded if they discovered what their dearest friends actually know
about  them?  - Through  knowing  ourselves,  and  regarding  our  own
nature as a moving sphere of moods and opinions, and thus learning to
despise ourself a little,  we restore our proper equilibrium with others.  It
is true we  have good reason to think little of each of our acquaintances,
even the greatest of them; but equally good  reason to direct this feeling
back  on  to  ourself.  - And  so,  since  we  can  endure  ourself,  let  us  also
endure other people; and perhaps to each of us there will come the more
joyful hour when we exclaim:
'Friends, there are no  friends!' thus said the dying sage;
'Foes,  there are no foes!'  say  I,  the  living fool.
WOMAN
AND
CHILD
The perfect woman. - l he perfect woman is a higher type of human being
than the perfect man: also something much rarer. - The natural science of
the animals offers a means of demonstrating the truth of this proposition.
Friendship and  marriage.  - The best  friend  will  probably acquire  the  best
wife,  because a good  marriage is founded  on the talent for friendship.
Continuance  of  the  parents.  - The  unresolved  dissonances  between  the
characters  and  dispositions  of  the  parents  continue  to  resound  in  the
nature of the child and  constitute the history of his  inner sufferings.
From the mother. - Everyone bears within him a picture of woman derived
from his mother: it is this which determines whether, in his dealings with
women,  he  respects  them or despises them or is in general indifferent to
them.
Correcting nature. - If one does not have a good father one should furnish
oneself with one.
Fathers and sons.  - Fathers  have  much to  do to  make amends for having
sons.
Error of noble women. - Noble women think that a thing does not exist if it
is not possible to speak about it in company.
A male sickness. - For the male  sickness of self-contempt the surest cure is
to be loved by a clever woman.
A kind of jealousy. - Mothers are easily jealous of the friends of their sons
when these enjoy particular success. Usually a mother loves herself in her
son more  than  she  does  her actual son.
Rational irrationality. - In the maturity of his life and understanding a man
is overcome by the feeling his father was wrong to beget him.
W O M A N   A N D   C H I L D
Motherly  goodness.  - Some  mothers  need  happy,  respected  children,
others unhappy ones: otherwise she has  no chance to exhibit her goodness as a mother.
Diverse sighs .  - Some  men  have sighed over the abduction of their wives,
most however over the fact that no one wanted to abduct them.
Love-matches.  - Marriages  contracted  from  love  (so-called  love-matches)
have error for their father and need for their mother.
Friendship  with  women .  - Women  are  quite  able  to  make  friends  with  a
man; but to preserve such a friendship - that no doubt requires the assistance of a slight physical antipathy.
Boredom . - Many people,  especially women,  never feel boredom because
they have never learned to work properly.
An  element  of love.  - In  every  kind  of  womanly  love  there  also  appears
something of motherly love.
Unity of  place and action .  - If married couples did  not live together good
marriages would be more common.
Usual  consequences  of  marriage.  - All  society  that  does  not  elevate  one
draws one  down,  and  conversely;  that  is  why  men  usually  sink a  little
when they take wives,  while  their wives are  elevated  a  little.  Men who
are too intellectual have great ·need  of marriage,  though they resist it as
they would a foul-tasting medicine.
Teaching to command. - Children of modest families need to be taught how
to command as other children need to be taught obedience.
The  desire  to  become  loved.  - Engaged  people  who  have  been  brought
together by convenience often  strive  to  become  loved,  so  as to  do  away
with  the  reproach  of acting  out  of cold,  calculating  utility.  Those  who
have  adopted  Christianity  for  the  sake  of  advantage  likewise  strive  to
become  genuinely  devout;  it  makes  the  religious  pantomime  easier  for
them.
No standstill in love. - A musician who loves slow tempo will take a piece of
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN
music more and more slowly. In the same way there is no standstill in any
kind of love.
Modesty.  - Generally  speaking,  the  more beautiful  a woman is the more
modest she is.
Marriage with stability.  - A marriage in which each of the parties seeks to
achieve  an  individual  goal  through  the  other  will  stand  up  well;  for
example  when  the  wife  seeks  to  become famous  through  the  husband,
the husband liked through the wife.
Proteus nature. - Women in  love come to be just as  they are  in  the  image
that the men by whom  they are loved have of them.
Love  and  possession.  - Women  mostly  love  a  man  of  consequence  as
though they want to have him for themselves alone.  They would gladly
keep  him  under lock and key if their vanity did  not dissuade  them: for
this desires him to appear of consequence before others as well.
Test of a good marriage. - A marriage proves itself a good marriage by being
able to endure an occasional 'exception' .
Means of getting anyone  to do anything.  - Anyone can  be  so fatigued  and
weakened  by agitation,  fears,  overloading with  work  and  thinking  that
he will no longer resist anything that appears complicated but yield to it a fact known  to diplomats and  to women.
Respectability and honesty. - Every girl who thinks to employ her youthful
charms  alone  to provide  for her entire life,  and  whose cunning is in addition  prompted  by a  wise mother,  has precisely the same objective as a courtesan, only she pursues it more  shrewdly and less honestly.
Masks. - There are women who,  however you may search them, prove to
have no content but are purely masks. The man who associates with such
almost  spectral,  necessarily  unsatisfied  beings  is  to  be  commiserated
with,  yet it is precisely they who are able to arouse the desire of the man
most strongly: he seeks for her soul - and goes on seeking.
Marriage as a long conversation. - When entering into a marriage one ought
to ask  oneself:  do you  believe  you  are  going  to  enjoy  talking  with  this
woman  up  into  your old  age?  Everything else  in  marriage  is transitory,
but most of the time you are together will be devoted to conversation.
W O M A N   A N D   C H I L D
Girlish dreams. - Inexperienced girls flatter themselves with the idea that it
stands within their power to make a man happy; later on they learn that
to assume that all that is required to make a man happy is a girl is really to
despise him. - The vanity of women demands that a man should be more
than a happy husband.
Faust and Gretchen dying out. - As a very discerning scholar has remarked,
the  educated  men  of  present-day  Germany  resemble  a  cross  between
Mephistopheles  and  Wagner,  but  certainly  do  not  resemble  Fausts,
whom their grandfathers  (in  their youth  at least) felt rumbling  within
them. •  For two  reasons,  therefore - to continue this proposition - Gretchens are no longer  suited  to  them.  And  because  they are no  longer desired they are,  it seems, dying out.
Girls as grammar-school pupils. - For heaven's sake don't let us transmit our
grammar-school education to girls! An education that so often takes spirited,  knowledge-thirsty,  passionate young people and makes of them images of their teachers!
Without competitors. - Women can easily tell whether or not a man's soul
has already been taken possession of; they want to be loved without competitors and resent the objects of his ambition, his political activities,  his arts and sciences, if he has a passion for such things. Except, that is, if he
shines on account of them - in that case they hope that a love-union with
him will increase the amount they shine; if this is how things are, they encourage their lover.
The female intellect. - The intellect of women reveals itself as complete control and presence of mind and the utilization of every advantage. She bestows it on her children as her fundamental quality,  and the father adds the darker background of the will. His influence determines as it were the
rhythm  and  harmony  with  which  the  new  life  is  to  be  played;  but  its
melody comes from the woman. - Expressed for those who know how to
interpret: women possess reason, men temperament and passion.  This is
not contradicted by the fact that men in fact make so much better use of
their reason: they possess deeper, more powerful drives; it is these that
carry their reason,  which is in  itself something passive,  so far.  Women
often secretly wonder at the great respect men pay to the female temperament.  If,  in  the choice of their marriage partner,  men  seek above all  a deep nature  full of  feeling,  while  women  seek a  shrewd,  lively minded
and  brilliant  nature,  it  is  clear  that  at  bottom  the  man  is  seeking  an
idealized man, the woman an idealized woman - what they are seeking,
•  Faust, Gretchen,  Mephistopheles,  Wagner:  characters in Goethe's Faust
HUMAN,  ALL  TOO  HUMAN
that  is  to  say,  is  not  a  complement  but  a  perfecting  of  their own  best
qualities.
A judgement  of  Hesiod's  confirmed. *  - It is a  sign  of the  shrewdness  of
women that almost everywhere they have known how to get themselves
fed, like drones in the beehive. One should consider,  however, what that
fact  means  originally,  and  why  men  do  not  have  themselves  fed  by
women.  It  is certainly because  male  vanity  and  respect  are greater than
female shrewdness; for women  have known  how through  subordination
to  secure  for  themselves  the  preponderant  advantage,  even  indeed  the
dominion.  Even  the  tending  of  children  could  originally  have  been
employed by the shrewdness of women as a pretext for avoiding work as
much as possible.  And even now when they are genuinely occupied, for
example  as  housekeepers,  they  know  how  to  make  such  a  mindconfusing to-do about it that men  usually  overestimate  the value of their activity tenfold.
The shortsighted are in love. - Sometimes it  requires only a stronger pair of
spectacles to cure the lover,  and he who had the imagination to picture a
face,  a  figure  twenty  years  older  would  perhaps  pass  through  life  very
undisturbed .
Women  in hate.  - In  a  state of hatred  women  are  more  dangerous  than
men;  first  and  foremost because,  once  their  hostility  has been  aroused,
they are hampered by no considerations of fairness but allow their hatred
to grow undisturbed to its ultimate consequences; then because  they are
practised in discovering the wounded  places  everyone,  every party possesses  and  striking at  them:  to  which  end  their  dagger-pointed  intellect renders  them  excellent  service  (whereas  at  the  sight  of  wounds  men
become  restrained  and  often  inclined to reconciliation and generosity).
Love. - The idolization of love practised by women is fundamentally and
originally  an  invention  of  their  shrewdness,  inasmuch  as  it  enhances
their  power  and  makes  them  seem  ever  more  desirable  in  the  eyes  of
men.  But through centuries-long habituation  to  this exaggerated evaluation of love it has come to pass that they have become entangled in their own net and forgotten how it originated. They themselves are now more
deceived  than  men  are  and consequently suffer more from the  disillusionment that is almost certain to come into the life of every woman - insofar as she has sufficient intelligence and imagination to be deceived and disillusioned at all.
On the emancipation of women. - Are women able to be just at all, since they
•  Hesiod: Greek  epic  poet of  the  eighth  century  BC
W O M A N   A N D   C H I L D
are so accustomed  to loving,  to at once taking sides for or against? That
too is why they are less interested in  causes,  more interested in persons:
if they are interested in a cause, however, they at once become its .vehement advocates and thereby spoil the purity of its influence. There is thus no  little  danger  in  entrusting  politics  or  certain  kinds  of  science  (for
example  history)  to  them.  For  what  could  be  rarer  than  a  woman  who
really  knew  what  science  is?  The  best  of  them  even  harbour  in  their
bosom a secret contempt for it, as though they were in some way superior
to it.  Perhaps all this may change,  but for the  present that is how things
are.
41 7
Inspiration  in female judgement.  - Those  sudden  decisions  for  or  against
that women are  accustomed  to take,  the  lightning-quick illumination of
personal relationships through the inclinations and aversions that break
forth from  them,  in  short  the  demonstrations  of female  injustice,  have
been invested with a lustre by enamoured men, as though all women had
inspirations of wisdom even without the Delphic cauldron and the band
of  laurel:  and  their  declarations  are  interpreted  and  explained  for  long
afterwards as though they were sibylline oracles.  If you reflect, however,
that there is something  to be  said  for every person and every  cause but
also something to be said against them,  that all things have not only two
sides but three or four,  it becomes almost impossible for such sudden decisions to be completely erroneous; one could even go so far as to say that the nature of things is so constructed that women are always in the right.
Letting oneself be loved. - Because one party in a loving couple is usually the
one  who loves and the other the one  who  is  loved,  the belief has arisen
that in every love affair there exists a fixed quantity of love: the more one
party seizes for himself the less is left for the other. In exceptional cases it
happens that the vanity of each of the parties persuades him that he is the
one who must be  loved;  so  that both want to  let themselves be  loved:  a
state  of  things  which,  especially  in  marriage,  produces  many  a  halfcomic,  half-absurd situation.
Contradictions  in female heads.  - Because  women  are  so much  more  personal than objective, tendencies that logically contradict one another are capable of getting on together within their circle of ideas: for they are accustomed  to  become  enthusiastic  for  the  representatives  of  these  tendencies one after the other and to adopt their systems wholesale; but they do so in such a way that there is always an unemployed spot where a new
personality  later gains ascendancy.  It  does  perhaps happen  that all  the
philosophy in the head of an elderly woman consists of nothing but such
unemployed spots.
Who suffers  more?  - After  a  quarrel  between  a  man  and  a  woman,  one
HUMAN,  ALL  TOO  HUMAN
suffers most at the idea of having hurt the other,  while the other suffers
most at the idea of not having hurt the other enough,  from which follow
the tears,  sobs and  distracted mien through which the heart of the other
is to be made heavy even after the quarrel is over.
Opportunity for female generosity. - If one sets aside the demands of custom
for a  moment,  one might very well consider whether nature and reason
do not dictate that a man ought to have two marriages, perhaps in the following  form.  At  first,  at  the  age  of twenty-two,  he  would  marry  a  girl older  than  him  who  is  intellectually  and  morally  his  superior and  who
can  lead  him  through  the  perils  of the  twenties  (ambition,  hatred,  selfcontempt,  passions of all kinds). Later, her love would  pass over wholly into  the motherly,  and  she  would  not merely endure it but actively encourage it if,  in  his  thirties,  the man should enter into an alliance with a young  girl  whose  education  he  would  himself  take  in  hand.  - For  the
twenties marriage is a  necessary institution,  for the  thirties  a  useful  but
not a necessary one:  in later life it is often harmful and promotes the spiritual retrogression of the man.
Tragedy of childhood. - It is perhaps no rare occurrence that noble-minded
and  aspiring  people  have  to  undergo  their severest  trials in  their childhood:  perhaps  through  having  to  assert  themselves  against  a  lowminded  father  absorbed  in  appearance  and  deception,  or,  like  Lord Byron, to live in continual conflict with a childish and irritable mother. If
one has experienced such a  thing one will,  one's whole life long,  never
get  over the  knowledge  of who  one's greatest and  most dangerous  foe
has actually been.
Parental folly.  - When it  comes  to assessing the  quality  of a  person,  the
greatest errors  are made by his parents:  this  is a fact,  but how shall one
explain it? Do the parents have too much experience of the child and are
they no  longer  capable  of bringing all these experiences together into a
unity?  It  has  been  remarked  that  travellers  among  strange  peoples  correctly  grasp  the general distinguishing  features  of a  people  only during the earliest period of their sojourn with them; the better they get to know
them,  the less capable they are of seeing what is typical and distinguishing in them.  As soon as they become near-sighted, their eyes cease to be far-sighted. Do the parents judge the child mistakenly because they have
never stood far enough away from  him? - A  quite  different explanation
would be the  following:  men are accustomed to cease to reflect on those
things which surround them most closely and simply to accept them.  Perhaps  the  habitual  thoughtlessness  of  parents  is  the  reason  why,  when they  are for once compelled to judge  their  children,  they judge them so
badly.
W O M A N   A N D   C H I L D
From the future of marriage.  - Those  noble,  free-thinking  women who set
themselves  the  task  of  the  education  and  elevation  of  the  female  sex
ought not  to  overlook one consideration:  the higher conception of marriage as the soul-friendship of two people of differing sex - a conception it is hoped the future will realize - contracted for the purpose of begetting
and  educating  a  new  generation:  such  a  marriage,  which  employs  the
sensual as it were only as a rare, occasional means to a greater end, will, it
is to be anticipated, probably require a natural assistant, namely concubinage.  For if,  for reasons of the health of the  husband,  the wife alone is to serve to satisfy his sexual needs,  then in the choice of a wife the decisive
consideration will be one hostile to the objectives of the marriage just indicated: the nature of its offspring will be left to chance and the likelihood of their being properly educated remote. A good wife who is supposed to
be  a  friend,  assistant,  mother,  family  head  and  housekeeper,  and  may
indeed have to run her own business or job quite apart from that of her
husband - such a wife cannot at the same time be a concubine: it would be
too much to  demand  of her.  Thus  in  the future a  state  of affairs  might
arise which  would  be  the  opposite  of  that  which obtained  in  Pericles'
Athens:  the men,  to whom in those days wives were little more than concubines,  turned  in addition  to  the Aspasias, •  because  they  desired  that head- and  heart-satisfying  companionship  such  as only  the  charm and
intellectual flexibility of women can create. All human institutions such
as marriage permit only a moderate degree of practical idealization,  failing which crude remedies have at once to be effected.
Storm-and-stress period of women. - In the three or four civilized countries
of Europe women can through a few centuries of education be made into
anything, even into men:  not in the sexual sense,  to be sure, but in every
other sense. Under such a regimen they will one day have acquired all the
male  strengths and virtues,  though they will also of course have had to
accept all their weaknesses and vices into the bargain: thus much can, as
aforesaid,  be extorted.  But how shall we endure the intermediate stage,
which may itself last  a  couple  of centuries,  during which  the primeval
properties  of  women,  their  follies  and  injustices,  are  still  asserting
themselves over  what  has  been  newly  learned and acquired?  This  will
be  the  age  in  which  the  actual  masculine affect will be anger:  anger at
the  fact  that  all  the  arts  and  sciences  have  been  choked  and  deluged
by  an  unheard-of  dilettantism,  philosophy  talked  to  death  by  mindbewildering  babble,  politics  more  fantastic  and  partisan  than  ever, society in full dissolution, because the custodians of ancient morality and
custom have become ludicrous  to  themselves  and are  striving to stand
outside morality  and custom in every respect.  For if women  possessed
their greatest power in morality and custom,  for what will they have to
grasp to regain a comparable abundance of power once they have abandoned morality and custom?
•  Aspasia: an Athenian courtesan,  the mistress of Pericles
HUMAN,  ALL  TOO  HUMAN
Marriage and the free spirit. - Will  free spirits live with women? In general I
believe  that,  like  the  prophetic  birds  of  antiquity,  as  present-day  representatives  of  true  thinking  and  truth-telling  they  must  prefer  to fly alone.
A happy marriage.  - Everything  habitual  draws around  us an ever firmer
net  of  spider-webs;  and  soon  we  notice  that  the  threads  have  become
cords and  that we ourself are sitting in the middle as the spider who has
caught  himself and  has  to  live  on  his  own  blood.  That  is  why  the  free
spirit hates all habituation and  rules, everything enduring and definitive,
that is why he  sorrowfully again and again rends apart the net that surrounds him: even though he will as a consequence suffer numerous great and small wounds - for he has to rend those threads from himself,  from his
own body and soul. He has to learn to love where he formerly hated, and
the  reverse.  Nothing,  indeed,  may be  impossible  to  him,  he  must  sow
dragon's teeth  in the same field  upon which he formerly poured out the
cornucopias of his benevolence. - From all this it may be inferred whether
he is created for a happy marriage.
Too close. - If we live  together with another person too closely, what happens is similar to when we repeatedly handle a good engraving with our bare hands: one day all we have left is a piece of dirty paper.  The soul of a
human being  too can finally become  tattered  by being handled  continually; and that is how it finally appears to us - we never see the beauty of its original design again. - One always loses by too familiar association with
friends  and  women;  and  sometimes what one loses is the pearl of one's
life.
The golden cradle. - The free spirit will always breathe a sigh of relief when
he has finally resolved  to shake off that motherly watching and warding
with which women govern him.  For what harm is there in the raw air that
has so anxiously been kept from  him,  what does  one real disadvantage,
loss,  mischance,  sickness, debt, befooling more or less in life mean, compared with the  unfreedom of the golden cradle,  peacock-tail fan and the oppressive  feeling  that  he  must  in  addition  be  grateful  because  he  is
waited on and spoiled like an infant? That is why the milk offered him by
the women who surround him can so easily turn to gall.
Voluntary  sacrifice.  - Women  of  consequence  alleviate  the  life  of  their
men,  when they happen to be great and famous,  by nothing so much as
by  becoming  as it  were  the  receptacle  of the  general  disfavour and  occasional  ill-humour of the rest of mankind.  Contemporaries tend to forgive their great men many blunders and follies,  indeed many crude acts of injustice, if only they can find someone whom, to relieve their feelings,
W O M A N   A N D   C H I L D
they may mishandle and slaughter as a sacrificial beast. It is no rare thing
for a woman to discover in herself the ambition to offer herself to this sacrifice, and then the man can feel very contented - assuming,  that is, that he  is  enough  of an  egoist  to  endure  the proximity of  such  a  voluntary
lightning-, storm- and rain-conductor.
Pleasing adversary.  - The  natural  tendency  of  women  towards  a  quiet,
calm,  happily harmonious existence, the way they pour soothing oil on
the sea of life,  unwittingly works against the heroic impulse in the heart
of the free spirit.  Without realizing it,  women behave as one would  do
who  removed  the stones from the path  of a wandering mineralogist  so
that his foot  should  not strike against them - whereas he has gone forth
so that his foot shall strike against them.
Disharmony of concords. - Women want to serve and in that they discover
their happiness:  and the free spirit wants not to be served and in that he
discovers his happiness.
Xantippe.  - Socrates  found  the  kind  of  wife  he  needed  - but  even  he
would not have sought her if he had known her well enough: the heroism
of even this free spirit would not have extended to that.  For Xantippe in
fact propelled  him  deeper and  deeper into  his  own proper profession,
inasmuch as she made his house and home uncomfortable and unhomely
to  him:  she taught him  to  live  in  the street and everywhere  where one
could chatter and be idle, and thus fashioned him into the greatest Athenian street-dialectician: so that in the end he had to compare himself to an importunate gadfly which a god had placed on the neck of the beautiful
steed Athens that it might never be allowed any rest.
Near-sighted. - Just as mothers can really see and feel only the visible and
palpable troubles of their children,  so  the wives of aspiring men cannot
bring  themselves to see their husbands suffering,  in  want or despised -
while  all  this is  perhaps  not merely a  sign  they have  chosen  their life's
course truly but actually a  guarantee that their great goals must at some
time  or  other  be  attained.  Wives  always  secretly  intrigue  against  the
higher  being  of  their  husbands;  they  desire  to  deprive  them  of  their
future for the sake of a quiet, comfortable present.
Power and freedom. - However much women may honour their husbands,
they nonetheless honour the  recognized  authorities and  conceptions of
society  even  more:  for  millennia  they  have  been  accustomed  to  stand
before everything dominant with head bowed and arms folded across the
chest, and they disapprove of all rebellion against the established power.
For this reason they attach themselves - without even intending to do so
HUMAN,  ALL  TOO  HUMAN
but rather as though by  instinct - to the wheels of a  free-spirited,  independent endeavour as a brake on them,  and sometimes  try the patience of their  husbands  beyond  all  measure,  especially  when  the  latter  persuade  themselves that what at bottom drives women to this behaviour is love.  To  disapprove  of  the  methods  of women  and  magnanimously  to
honour the  motivation behind  these  methods - that  is  the  way  of men
and often enough their despair.
Ceterum censeo. * - It is laughable when a society of the  penniless decrees
the abolition of the right of inheritance,  and it is no less laughable when
the childless participate in a country's practical lawgiving: - for they have
insufficient ballast in their ship to be able safely to set sail into the ocean of
the future.  But it appears e-1ually absurd when he who has chosen for his
task  the  most  universal  knowledge and the evaluation of the  totality of
existence  burdens  himself  with  personal  considerations  of family,  nutrition,  security,  care of wife and child,  and extends before his telescope that  dark veil through which  scarcely a ray from the distant firmament is
able to penetrate. Thus I too arrive at the proposition that in affairs of the
highest philosophical kind all married men are suspect.
Finally. - There are many kinds of hemlock, and fate usually finds an opportunity of setting a  cup of this poison draught to  the lips of the free spirit - so as  to  'punish'  him,  as all the  world  then  says.  What  will the
women around him  then  do? They  will lament and cry out and perhaps
disturb the repose of the thinker's sunset hours: as they did in the prison
at  Athens.  '0  Criton,  do  tell  someone  to  take  those  women  away!',
Socrates finally said.
•  Ceterum censeo: It is my opinion, moreover
A GLANCE AT
THE STATE
Permission to speak! - The demagogic character and the intention to appeal
to the masses is at present common to all political parties:  on account of
this  intention  they  are  all  compelled  to  transform  their  principles  into
great al fresco  stupidities  and  thus  to  paint  them on  the  wall.  This is no
longer alterable, indeed it would be pointless to raise so much as a finger
against it;  for in  this domain there apply  the  words of Voltaire:  quand Ia
populace se mele de  raisonner,  tout est perdu. •  Since this has happened one
has to accommodate oneself to the new conditions as one accommodates
oneself  when  an  earthquake  has  displaced  the  former boundaries  and
contours  of  the  ground and altered  the  value  of one's  property.  Moreover, if  the purpose of all politics really is  to  make life endurable for as many as possible,  then  these as-many-as-possible are entitled  to  determine  what  they  understand  by  an  endurable  life;  if  they  trust  to  their intellect also to discover the right means of attaining this goal, what good
is there in  doubting it? They want for once to forge for themselves their
own  fortunes and  misfortunes;  and if this  feeling of self-determination,
pride in the five or six ideas their head contains and brings forth, in  fact
renders  their  life  so pleasant to  them  they are  happy to bear the calamitous consequences of their narrow-mindedness, there is little to be objected to, always presupposing that this narrow-mindedness does not go so far as to  demand that everything should become politics in this sense, that
everyone  should  live  and  work  according  to  such  a  standard.  For  a  few
must first of all be allowed,  now more than ever,  to refrain from politics
and to step a little aside: they too are prompted to this by pleasure in selfdetermination;  and there may also be a degree of pride attached  to staying silent when too  many,  or even just  many,  are  speaking.  Then these few  must  be  forgiven  if  they  fail  to  take  the  happiness  of  the  many,
whether by the many one understands nations or social classes,  so very
seriously  and  are  now  and  then  guilty  of  an  ironic  posture;  for  their
seriousness is located elsewhere,  their happiness is something quite different, their goal is not to be encompassed by any clumsy hand that has only five fingers. Finally, from time to time there comes to them - what it
will certainly  be  hardest  to  concede  to  them  but  must be conceded to
them nonetheless - a  moment when they emerge from their silent solitude  and  again  try  the  power  of their  lungs:  for  then  they  call  to  one another like those gone astray in a wood in order to locate and encourage
one another; whereby much becomes audible,  to be sure,  that sounds ill
•  quand . . .  perdu: when the mob joins in and adds its voice, all is lost.
t61
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
to ears for which it is not intended. - Soon afterwards, though, it is again
still in the wood,  so still  that the buzzing,  humming and fluttering of the
countless  insects  that  live  in,  above  and  beneath  it can  again clearly be
heard.
Culture and caste. - A  higher culture can come into existence only where
there  are  two  different castes in  society:  that  of the  workers  and  that  of
the  idle,  of those  capable of true  leisure; or,  expressed more vigorously:
the  caste compelled  to work and the caste that works if it wants to.  Differences  in  good  fortune  and  happiness  are  not  the  essential  element when it comes  to the production of a  higher culture; in any event,  however,  the  caste  of  the  idle  is  the  more  capable  of  suffering  and  suffers more,  its enjoyment of existence  is  less,  its  task  heavier.  If an exchange
between  these  two  castes  should  take  place,  moreover,  so  that  more
obtuse,  less  spiritual  families  and  individuals  are  demoted  from  the
higher to the lower caste and  the more liberated in the latter obtain entry
into the higher,  then a  state is attained  beyond which there can be seen
only the open sea of indeterminate desires. - Thus speaks to us the fading
voice of ages past; but where are there still ears to hear it?
Of the  nobility.  - That  in  which  men  and  women  of  the  nobility  excel
others and  which gives  them  an undoubted right  to be  rated  higher consists in two arts  ever more enhanced through inheritance: the art of commanding and  the art  of proud obedience. - Now wherever commanding is part of the business of the day (as in the great mercantile and industrial
world)  there  arises  something  similar to  those families  'of the nobility',
but they lack nobility in obedience,  which is in the former an inheritance
from  the  feudal  ages  and  will  no  longer  grow  in  our  present  cultural
climate.
Subordination.  - Subordination,  which is  so  highly rated in the military
and  bureaucratic  state,  will  soon  become  as  unbelievable  to  us  as  the
closed tactics of the Jesuits already are; and when this subordination is no
longer possible a  host of the most astonishing operations will  no longer
be capable of achievement and the world will be the poorer. It is bound to
disappear because its foundation is disappearing: belief in unconditional
authority,  in  definitive  truth;  even  in military states it cannot be generated even by physical compulsion,  for its origin is the inherited adoration of  the  princely  as  of  something  suprahuman.  - In freer circumstances
people  subordinate  themselves  only  under  conditions,  as the result of a
mutual compact,  thus without prejudice  to their own interests.
Conscript armies.  - The greatest disadvantage  of the  conscript  armies  so
much extolled nowadays is the squandering of men of the highest civilization  they involve; it is only by the grace of circumstances that they exist
A  GLANCE  AT  T H E   STATE
at all - how thrifty and cautious we ought therefore to be with them, since
it requires a great space of time to create the chance conditions for the production  of  such  delicately  organized  brains!  But  as  the  Greeks  once waded in Greek blood, so Europeans now do in European blood: and it is
always  the  most  highly  cultivated,  those  who  guarantee  a  good  and
abundant posterity,  who are sacrificed in relatively the largest numbers:
for they stand in the van of the battle as the commanders and on account
of  their  superior  ambition  expose  themselves  most  to  danger.  - Now,
when quite different and  higher missions  than patria and honor demand
to  be  done,  crude  Roman  patriotism  is either  something dishonest  or a
sign of retardedness.
Hope and presumption. - Our social order will slowly melt away, as all previous orders have done, as soon as the suns of novel opinions shine out over mankind with a new heat.  One can desire this melting away only if
one harbours  hope:  and  one  may  reasonably harbour hope only if one
credits oneself and one's kind with more power in head and heart than is
possessed by the representatives of what at present exists. Usually, therefore,  this hope will be a piece of presumption and an overvaluation.
War. - Against war it can be said: it makes the victor stupid,  the defeated
malicious.  In  favour of war:  through producing these  two effects it  barbarizes and therefore makes more natural; it is the winter or hibernation time of culture,  mankind emerges from it stronger for good and evil.
In the service of the prince. - To be able to act with complete ruthlessness, a
statesman will do best to perform his work not on his own behalf but on
behalf of a prince. The glitter of this general disinterestedness will dazzle
the eye of the beholder, so that he will fail to see the knavery and harshness involved in the work of the statesman.
A question of power, not of justice. - To men who with regard to every cause
keep in view its higher utility, socialism, assuming it is really the rebellion
of those who have been  oppressed  and  held down  for millennia against
their oppressors, represents not a problem of justice (with its ludicrous,
feeble question: 'how far ought one to give in to its demands?') but only a
problem of power ('how far can one exploit its demands?'); the situation is
the same as in the case of a force of nature,  for example steam, which is
either  pressed  into  service  by  man  as  god  of  the  machine  or,  if  the
machine is faulty, if that is to say human calculation in its construction is
faulty,  blows  the  machine  and  man  with  it  to  pieces.  To  solve  this
question of power one has  to know how strong socialism  is,  with what
modification it can still be employed as a mighty lever within the existing
play of political forces; under certain circumstances one would even have
to do all one could to strengthen it.  Whenever a great force exists - even
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
though it be the most dangerous - mankind has to consider how to make
of it  an  instrument for  the  attainment of its  objectives.  - Socialism will
acquire  rights  only  if  war  appears  to  be  imminent  between  the  two
powers,  the  representatives of the old  and  the  new,  but  prudent calculation of possible advantage and preservation gives  rise to the  desire on the part of both parties for a compact. Without a compact no rights. Up to
now, however,  there  has  in the  said  domain been  neither  war nor compacts, and thus  no rights, no 'ought', either.
Making use of petty dishonesty. - The power of the press resides in the fact
that the individual who works for it feels  very little sense of duty or obligation. Usually he expresses his opinion, but sometimes, in the service of his party or the policy of his country or in the service of himself, he does
not express it.  Such little lapses into dishonesty, or perhaps merely a dishonest reticence,  are not hard for the individual to bear, but their consequences are extraordinary because these little laps·es on the part of many are  perpetrated  simultaneously.  Each  of  them  says  to  himself:  'In
exchange for such  slight  services I shall have a better time of it; if I refuse
such  little  acts  of discretion  I  shall  make  myself impossible'.  Because  it
seems  almost  a  matter  of  indifference  morally  whether  one  writes  one
more line or fails to write it, perhaps moreover without one's name being
attached to it, anyone possessing money and influence can transform any
opinion into public opinion.  He who knows that most people are weak in
small  matters  and  desires  to  attain  to his goal by means of them is thus
always a dangerous man.
Complaining too loudly. - When abuses (for example defects in an administration,  corruption  and  arbitrary  favouritism  in  political  or  learned bodies)  are  painted  in  greatly  exaggerated  colours,  the  representation
may  fail  in  its  effect  among  the  knowledgeable  but will produce all  the
stronger  an  effect  upon  the  unknowledgeable  (who  would  have
remained indifferent to a cautious, sober representation).  Since these are
markedly in  the  majority,  however,  and  harbour  within  them  stronger
willpower and a more impetuous desire for action, that exaggeration will
lead to investigations, punishments, undertakings, reorganizations. - To
this extent it is useful  to paint  abuses  in exaggerated colours.
The apparent weather-makers of politics. - Just as the people secretly assume
that  he  who  understands  the  weather  and  can  forecast  it  a  day  ahead
actually makes the weather, so, with a display of superstitious faith, even
the learned and cultivated attribute to  great statesmen all the important
changes  and  turns of events that take place during their term of office as
being their own work,  provided it is apparent that they knew something
about them before others  did  and  calculated accordingly:  thus they  too
A  G L A N C E   AT  THE  STATE
are  taken  for  weather-makers  - and this  faith  is  not  the least  effective
instrument of their power.
New and old  conception of government.  - To  distinguish  between  government  and  people  as  though  there  were  here  two  distinct  spheres  of power, a stronger and higher and a weaker and lower, which treated and
came to an understanding with one another, is a piece of inherited political sensibility which even now corresponds exactly to the historical settlement of the power situation in  most states.  When, for example, Bismarck describes the constitutional form as a compromise between government
and  people,  he  speaks in accordance with a principle whose rationality
lies in  history (and for just  that reason,  to be  sure,  also an admixture of
irrationality,  without  which  nothing  human  can  exist).  On  the  other
hand, one is now supposed to learn - in accordance with a principle that
has emerged purely from the head and is supposed to make history - that
government is nothing but an organ of the people and not a  provident,
venerable 'above' in relation to a diffident 'below'. Before one accepts this
hitherto unhistorical and arbitrary,  if nonetheless more logical assertion
of the concept government,  one might be advised to consider the consequences: for the relationship between people and government is the most pervasive ideal relationship upon which commerce between teacher and
pupil,  lord and  servants,  father and family,  general and soldier,  master
and  apprentice  have  unconsciously  been  modelled.  All  these  relationships are now, under the influence of the dominant constitutional form of government, altering their shape a little: they are becoming compromises.
But how greatly they will change and be displaced, exchange their name
and nature, when that latest concept has conquered minds everywhere! for  which,  however,  it  may  well  take  another  century.  In  this  matter nothing is more desirable than caution and slow evolution.
Justice as party call-notes. - Noble (if not particularly judicious) representatives of the ruling class can by all means vow: let us treat men as equals, concede to  them equal rights.  To this extent a  socialist mode of thought
resting  on justice  is  possible;  but,  as  aforesaid,  only  within  the  ruling
class,  which in  this case practises justice with  sacrifices and  self-denials.
To demand equality of rights,  on  the  other  hand,  as the socialists of the
subject caste do,  is never an emanation of justice but of greed.  - If one
holds  up bleeding  chunks  of  meat  to  an  animal  and  takes  them  away
again until it finally roars:  do you  think this roaring has anything to  do
with justice?
Property and justice. - When the  socialists show that the division of property among present-day  mankind  is the  outcome of countless  acts of injustice  and  violence,  and  in  summa  repudiate  any  obligation  towards something having so unjust a foundation, they are seeing only one aspect
of the matter.  The entire past of the old culture was erected upon force,
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
slavery, deception, error; but we, the heirs and inheritors of all these past
things, cannot decree our own abolition and may not wish away a single
part of them.  The  disposition  to  injustice  inhabits the  souls of the  nonpossessers too, they are no better than the possessers and have no moral prerogative  over  them,  for  their  own  ancestors  were  at  some  time  or
other  possessers.  What  is  needed  is  not  a  forcible  redistribution  but  a
gradual transformation of mind: the sense of justice must grow greater in
everyone,  the  instinct for violence weaker.
The steersman of the passions. - The statesman excites public passions so as
to profit from the counter-passions thereby aroused. To take an example:
any German  statesman  knows well  that the Catholic Church will  never
form  an  alliance  with  Russia,  but  would  indeed  rather  form  one  even
with  the  Turks;  he  likewise  knows  that  an  alliance  between  France  and
Russia would spell  nothing  but danger for Germany.  If,  therefore,  he  is
able  to  make  of France  the  hearth  and  home  of the  Catholic Church  he
will have abolished this danger for a long time to come. Consequently he
has  an  interest in  exhibiting hatred  towards  the  Catholics and,  through
hostile  acts of all kinds,  transforming those who acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  Pope  into  a  passionate  political  power  which,  hostile  to German  policy,  will  naturally ally  itself with  France  as  the  opponent of
Germany:  his  goal  is just as necessarily  the Catholicization of France  as
Mirabeau's* was its decatholicization. - One state thus desires the darkening of millions of minds of another state so as to derive advantage from this darkening. It is the same disposition as that which favours the republican  form of government of the neighbouring state - le desordre organise, as  Merimee  calls  it  - for  the  sole  reason  that  it  assumes  this  form  of
government will make the people feebler, more divided and less capable
of war.
Those  who are dangerous  among the revolutionary  spirits.  - Those  who are
deliberating  the  revolutionary  overthrow  of  society  should  be  divided
into those who want to achieve something for themselves and those who
want  to  achieve  something  for  their  children  and  grandchildren.  The
latter are  the  more  dangerous; for they believe they are disinterested and
possess the good conscience that goes with that belief. The others can be
bought off:  the ruling orders are  still rich and prudent enough for that.
The  danger begins  as soon  as  the  goals become impersonal;  the  revolutionary from impersonal interests can regard the defenders of the existing  system as personally interested and  thus feel superior to them.
Political value of fatherhood. - If a man has no sons he lacks full right to a
voice  in  discussion  of  public  affairs.  One  has  to  have  staked,  with  the
others, that which one loves best: that alone ties one firmly to the state; to
•  Honore Gabriel de Riqueti, Conte de Mirabeau (1749-91): French statesman
t66
A  G LA N C E   AT  T H E   STATE
possess  a just and  natural  interest in the  fate  of institutions one  has  to
have in view the happiness of one's posterity, and thus of course to possess posterity.  The evolution of a  higher morality in a  person  depends upon his having sons; the fact makes him unegoistic, or, more correctly,
it broadens his egoism in respect of duration and enables him seriously to
pursue objectives that  transcend his individual lifespan.
Pride of ancestry. - One has a right to be proud of a line of good ancestors up
to one's father - but not of a line as such,  for everyone has this. Origin in
good  ancestors  constitutes nobility of birth;  a single break in  that chain,
that is to say one bad forefather, annuls nobility of birth. One ought to ask
of anyone who boasts of his noblity: have you no violent, covetous,  dissolute, wicked, cruel men among your forefathers? If he is able to answer No  to  that  question  knowledgeably  and  with  a  clear  conscience  one
should sue for his friendship.
Slaves and workers.  - That we  place  more  value  on  satisfaction of vanity
than on any other form of well-being (security, accommodation, pleasure
of all  kinds) is demonstrated to a  ludicrous degree in  the fact that, quite
apart from any political reasons, everyone desires the abolition of slavery
and  abominates  the  idea  of reducing  people  to  this  condition:  whereas
everyone must at the  same time realize that slaves live in every respect
more happily and in greater security than the modern worker,  and that
the work done by slaves is very little work compared with that done by
the  'worker' .  One  protests  in  the  name  of  'human  dignity':  but  that,
expressed  more  simply,  is  that  precious  vanity  which  feels  being  unequal,  being publicly rated lower,  as the hardest lot. - The Cynic thinks differently,  because he  despises  honour: - and thus Diogenes was for a
time a slave and private tutor.
Leading spirits and their instruments. - We see great statesmen, and in general all those who need to employ many people in the execution of their designs, acting in one of two ways: either they select those who are suited
to  their  designs  with great care  and  subtlety and then  leave  them  relatively great freedom of movement because  they know that the nature of these  select people will take them where they themselves  want  them to
be; or they select at random,  taking indeed what happens to lie at hand,
but shape out of this clay something that will  serve their purpose.  This
latter kind is the more violent and desires more easily subjugated instruments;  his  knowledge  of  people  is  much  less,  his  contempt  for  them greater than in the case of the first-named spirits, but the machine he constructs commonly works better than does the machine from the former's workshop.
Arbitrary  law  necessary.  - Jurists  dispute  as  to  whether  the  law  that
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
triumphs in a  nation  ought to  be  that which  has been  most  thoroughly
thought  out  or  that  which  is  easiest  to  understand.  The  former,  the
supreme  model  of which  is the Roman,  seems  to the  layman  incomprehensible and consequently not an expression of his sense of law.  Popular codes of law,  for example the  Germanic,  have been crude,  superstitious,
illogical and in  part stupid,  but  they corresponded  to quite definite,  inherited  and  indigenous  custom  and  feelings.  - Where,  however,  law  is no  longer  tradition,  as  is  the  case  with  us,  it  can  only  be  commanded,
imposed  by  constraint;  none  of  us  any  longer  possesses  a  traditional
sense  of law,  so  we  have  to  put  up  with arbitrary law,  which  is  the  expression of the necessity of the fact that there has to be law. The most logical  is  in  this  event  the  most  acceptable,  because  it  is  the  most  impartial: even admitting that in every case the smallest unit of measurement in the
relationship between crime and punishment is fixed arbitrarily.
The great man of the masses.  - The  recipe for  that which  the  masses call a
great man is easy  to give.  Under  all circumstances one must  procure for
them  something  they  find  very  pleasant,  or  first  put  it  into  their  heads
that this or that would be very pleasant and then give it to them.  But at no
price  do  it  immediately:  one  has  to  gain  it by  the  greatest  exertion  and
struggle, or seem to do so. The masses must receive the impression that a
mighty, indeed  invincible force of will is present; at the least it must seem
to  be  present.  Everyone  admires  strength  of will because  no  one  has  it
and everyone tells himself that if he did have it he and his egoism would
no longer know any limitations. If it now appears that such a strong will,
instead of listening to the dictates of its own desires, performs something
the  masses  find  very  pleasant,  everyone  marvels  on  two  accounts  and
congratulates himself. For the rest, the great man possesses all the qualities. of the masses: thus are they all the less embarrassed in his presence, thus  is  he  all  the  more  popular.  He  is  violent,  envious,  exploitative,
scheming,  fawning,  cringing, arrogant, all according to circumstances.
Prince and god. - Men traffic with their princes in much the same way as
they do with their god, as indeed the prince has been to a great degree the
representative of the god,  or at least his high priest. This almost uncanny
mood of reverence and fear and shame  has grown and is growing much
feebler,  but  occasionally  it flares up and  attaches  itself to  powerful persons in general. The cult of the genius is an echo of this reverence for gods and princes. Wherever there is a striving to exalt individual men into the
suprahuman,  there also  appears  the tendency to imagine whole classes
of the people as being coarser and lower than they really are.
My utopia. - In a better ordering of society the heavy work and exigencies
of life will be  apportioned to  him  who suffers least as a  consequence of
them, that is to say to the most insensible, and thus step by step up to him
t68
A  G L A N C E   AT  THE  STATE
who is most sensitive to the most highly sublimated  species of suffering
and  who  therefore  suffers  even  when  life  is  alleviated  to  the  greatest
degree possible.
A delusion in the theory of revolution. - There are  political  and  social  fantasists  who  with  fiery eloquence  invite a  revolutionary  overturning  of all social orders in  the belief that the proudest temple of fair humanity will
then at once rise up as though of its own accord.  In these perilous dreams
there is still an echo of Rousseau's superstition, which believes in a  miraculous  primeval  but  as  it  were  buried  goodness  of  human  nature  and ascribes all the blame for this burying to the institutions of culture in the
form  of  society,  state  and  education.  The  experiences  of  history  have
taught us, unfortunately, that every such revolution brings about the resurrection  of  the  most  savage  energies  in  the  shape  of the  long-buried dreadfulness and excesses of the most distant ages:  that a revolution can
thus be a source of energy in a mankind grown feeble but never a regulator,  architect,  artist,  perfector of human nature. - It is not Voltaire's moderate nature,  inclined as it was to ordering,  purifying and reconstructing, but Rousseau's passionate follies and half-lies that called forth the optimistic spirit of the Revolution against which  I cry:  'Ecrasez /'infame!' It is this spirit that has for a long time banished the spirit of the Enlightenment and of
progressive evolution: let us see - each of us within himself - whether it is
possible to call it back!
Moderation. - When thought and  inquiry  have become decisive - when,
that  is  to  say,  free-spiritedness  has become a  quality of the character action  tends  to  moderation:  for  thought  and  inquiry  weaken  covetousness, draw much of the available energy to themselves for the promotion of spiritual objectives,  and reveal  the merely  half-usefulness or the total
uselessness and  perilousness  of all  sudden  changes.
Resurrection of the spirit. - A  nation usually rejuvenates itself on the political sickbed and rediscovers its spirit, which it gradually lost in its seeking for and assertion of power. Culture owes this above all to the ages of political weakness.
New opinions in an  old house. - The  overturning of opinions does  not  immediately follow upon the overturning of institutions: the novel opinions continue,  rather,  to  live on  for a  long time in  the deserted  and by  now
uncomfortable house of their predecessors, and even keep it in good condition because they have nowhere else to live.
Schooling.  - In  great  cities  the  schooling  will  always  be  at  the  best
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
mediocre, for the same reason that in great kitchens the cooking will be at
best mediocre.
Innocent corruption. - In all institutions that are not open to the biting air of
public  criticism  an  innocent  corruption  flourishes  like  a  fungus  (as,  for
example,  in learned bodies and  senates).
Scholars as politicians. - Scholars who become politicians are usually allotted the comic role of being the good conscience of a  party's  policy.
The  wolf behind  the sheep.  - Almost  every  politician  has  at  some  time  or
other  such need of an honest man that he breaks into a sheepstall like a
ravenous wolf:  not,  however, so as then to eat the ram he has stolen, but
so as to hide himself behind  its woolly back.
Ages of happiness. - An age of happiness is quite impossible, because men
want  only  to  desire  it  but  not  to  have  it,  and  every  individual  who
experiences good times  learns to downright pray for misery and disquietude.  The  destiny  of man is designed  for happy  moments - every life has them - but not for happy ages.  Nonetheless they will remain fixed in the
imagination of man as 'the other side of the hill' because they have been
inherited  from ages past: for the concept of the age of happiness was no
doubt acquired in primeval times from that condition in which, after violent  exertion  in  hunting  and  warfare,  man  gives  himself  up  to  repose, stretches his limbs and hears the pinions of sleep rustling about him.  It is
a false conclusion if,  in accordance with that ancient familiar experience,
man imagines that, after whole ages of toil and deprivation, he can then partake of that condition of happiness correspondingly enhanced and protracted.
Religion  and  government.  - As  long  as  the  state,  or,  more  clearly,  the
government  knows  itself  appointed  as  guardian  for  the  benefit  of  the
masses not yet of age, and on their behalf considers the question whether
religion is to be  preserved or abolished,  it is very highly probable that it
will always decide  for the preservation of religion.  For religion quietens
the heart of the individual in times of loss, deprivation,  fear, distrust, in
those instances, that is to say, in which the government feels unable to do
anything  towards  alleviating  the  psychical  sufferings  of  the  private
person: even in the case of universal,  unavoidable and in the immediate
prospect inevitable evils (famines, financial crises, wars), indeed, religion
guarantees  a  calm,  patient,  trusting  disposition  among  the  masses.
Wherever the chance or inevitable shortcomings of the state government
or the perilous consequences of dynastic interests force themselves upon
the  attention  of  the  knowledgeable  man  and  put  him  in  a  refractory
mood,  the  unknowledgeable  will  think  they  see  the  hand  of God  and
A  G L A N C E   AT  THE  STATE
patiently submit to instructions from above (in which concept divine and
human government are usually fused): thus internal civil peace and continuity of development is ensured. The power that lies in unity of popular sentiment, in the fact that everyone holds the same opinions and has the
same objectives,  is sealed and protected by  religion, apart from in  those
rare cases in  which  a  priesthood cannot agree  with the authorities as to
the price of its services  and  enters into conflict with  them.  As a  rule  the
state will know how to win the priests over to itself because it needs  their
concealed  and intimate education of souls  and  knows  how to  value  servants  who  appear  outwardly  to  represent  a  quite  different  interest.
Without  the  assistance  of  the  priests  even  now  no  power  can  become
'legitimate': as Napoleon  grasped.  - Thus  absolute  tutelary government
and the careful preservation of religion necessarily go together.  In  this it
has to be presupposed that the governing persons and classes are enlightened as to the advantages accruing to them from religion and thus feel to a certain  extent superior  to  it,  inasmuch as they  employ it  as an  instrument; which is why free-spiritedness has its origin here. - But what if that quite different conception  of government such as is taught in democratic
states begins to prevail? If it is regarded as nothing but the instrument of
the  popular  will,  not as an Above in  relation to a  Below  but  merely  as a
function  of  the  sole  sovereign  power,  the  people?  Here  the  attitude
towards religion adopted by the government can only be the same as that
adopted towards it by the people; every dissemination of enlightenment
must find its echo  in  their representatives,  and an employment and  exploitation  of the  religious drives and  consolations  for political ends  will no longer be so easy (unless it happens that powerful party leaders for a
time exercise an influence similar to that of enlightened despotism). But if
the state is no longer free to profit from religion itself or the people come
to hold far too diverse opinions on religious matters for the government
to be  permitted any single unified policy regarding religious measures -
then the way out will necessarily be to treat religion as a private affair and
to  hand  it over to the  conscience and customs of every  individual.  The
first  consequence  of  this  will  be  an  apparent  strengthening of  religious
feeling,  inasmuch  as  suppressed  and  concealed  manifestations  of  it  to
which the state involuntarily or deliberately gave no breathing space now
break  forth  and  proceed  to  excesses  and  extremes;  later religion  will  be
overrun  with sects,  and  it will become  plain  that at the moment religion
was made a private affair an :1bundance of dragon's teeth were sown. The
sight of this conflict,  the malignant exposure of all the weaknesses of the
religious  confessions,  will  finally  admit  of no  other  way  out  than  that
every better and better gifted man will make irreligion  his private affair:
which  disposition  will  then  come  to  dominate  the  minds  of  those  in
government and,  almost against their will,  give to the measures they take
a character hostile to religion.  As soon as this happens  the mood of those
still moved by  religion,  who formerly adored  the state as something  half
or wholly sacred, will be transformed into one decidedly hostile to the state;
they will lie  in  wait for the  measures taken by the  government,  seek to
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
obstruct, to cross, to disrupt as much as they can, and through the heat of
their opposition drive the counter-party into an almost fanatical enthusiasm for the state; in which development they are secretly aided by the fact that, since their sundering from religion, hearts in these circles have felt a
sense of emptiness which they are seeking provisionally to fill with a kind
of substitute in the form of devotion to the state.  After these transitional
struggles,  which  may  well  last  a  long  time,  it  will at length be decided
whether  the  religious  parties  are  still  strong  enough  to  revive  the  past
and turn back the wheel: in which case the state will unavoidably fall into
the hands of enlightened despotism (perhaps less enlightened and more
troubled by fear than formerly) - or whether the anti-religious parties will
prevail  and,  perhaps  through  schooling and education,  in  the course of
generations  undermine  the  propagation  of  their  opponents  and  finally
render it impossible.  Then,  however, they too will experience a slackening  of  their  enthusiasm  for  the  state:  it  will  grow  ever  clearer  that, together  with  that  religious  adoration  to  which  the  state  is  a  sacred
mystery,  a  supraterrestrial  institution,  the  attitude  of  veneration  and
piety  towards  it  has  alsJ been  undermined.  Henceforth  the  individual
will see only that side of it  that promises  to be useful or threatens to  be
harmful to him,  and  will  bend  all his efforts to acquiring influence  upon
it.  But this competition will soon become too great, men and parties alternate too  quickly,  hurl  one  another  too fiercely down from the  hill after barely  having  attained  the  top.  None  of  the  measures  effected  by  a
government will be guaranteed continuity; everyone will draw back from
undertakings that require  quiet  tending  for  decades  or centuries  if their
fruits are to mature. No one will feel towards a law any greater obligation
than  that of bowing  for the moment to the force which backs up the law:
one will then at once set to work to subvert it with a new  force,  the creation of a new majority. Finally - one can say this with certainty - distrust of  all  government,  insight  into  the  uselessness  and  destructiveness  of
these short-winded struggles will impel men to a quite novel resolve: the
resolve  to do away  with  the concept of the state,  to the  abolition  of  the
distinction  between  private  and  public.  Private  companies  will  step  by
step absorb the business of the state: even the most resistant remainder of
what was formerly the work of government (for example its activities designed  to protect the private person  from the private  person)  will in the long  run  be  taken care of by  private contractors.  Disregard for and the
decline  and death of the state,  the liberation of the private person (I take
care  not to  say:  of the individual),  is the consequence of the democratic
conception of the state;  it is in this  that its mission lies.  When it has performed  its  task  - which  like  everything  human  bears  much  rationality and irrationality in its womb - when  every relapse into the old sickness
has  been  overcome,  a  new  page  will be  turned  in the  storybook of humanity  in  which  there  will  be  many  strange  tales  to  read  and  perhaps some of them good ones. - To repeat in brief what has just been said: the
interests of tutelary government and  the interests of religion go hand in
hand  together,  so that  when  the latter begins  to die out the foundations
A  GLANCE  AT  T H E   STATE
of the state too are undermined. The belief in a divine order in the realm
of politics, in a sacred mystery in the existence of the state, is of religious
origin: if religion disappears the state will unavoidably lose its ancient Isis
veil and cease to excite reverence. Viewed from close to, the sovereignty
of the people serves then to banish the last remnant of magic and superstition from this realm of feeling; modern democracy is the historical form of the decay of the state. - The prospect presented by this certain decay is,
however,  not in every  respect an unhappy one:  the prudence and selfinterest of men are of all their qualities  the best developed;  if the state is no longer equal to the demands of these forces then the last thing that will
ensue is chaos:  an invention more suited to their purpose than the state
was will gain victory over the state.  How many an organizing power has
mankind not seen die out:  for example that of the racial clan, which was
for millennia  far  mightier  than that of the  family  and  indeed ruled  and
regulated long before the family existed. We ourselves have seen the idea
of familial rights and power which once ruled as far as the Roman world
extended  grow  ever  paler  and  more  impotent.  Thus  a  later generation
will see the state too shrink to insignificance in various parts of the earth a notion many people of the present can hardly contemplate without fear and  revulsion.  To  work  for  the  dissemination  and  realization  of  this
notion is another thing, to be sure: one has to have a very presumptuous
idea  of  one's  own  intelligence  and  scarcely  half  an  understanding  of
history  to  set one's  hand  to the plough already - while no one can yet
show what seedcorn is afterwards to be scattered on the riven soil. Let us
therefore put our trust in 'the prudence and self-interest of men' to preserve the existence of the state for some time yet and to repulse the destructive experiments of the precipitate and the over-zealous!
Socialism  with  regard  to  its  means.  - Socialism  is  the  fanciful  younger
brother  of the  almost  expired  despotism  whose  heir it  wants  to be;  its
endeavours are thus in the profoundest sense reactionary.  For it desires
an  abundance  of  state  power  such  as  only  despotism  has  ever  had;
indeed it outbids all the despotisms  of the past inasmuch as it expressly
aspires  to  the  annihilation  of the  individual,  who  appears  to  it like  an
unauthorized  luxury  of  nature  destined  to  be  improved  into  a  useful
organ of the  community.  On  account  of  its  close  relationship  to  them  it
always appears in the proximity of all excessive deployments of power,
as the typical old socialist Plato did at the court of the Sicilian tyrant; it desires (and sometimes promotes)  the Caesarian despotic state of the present century because, as aforesaid, it would like to be its heir. But even this inheritance would be inadequate to its purposes: it requires a more complete subservience of the citizen to the absolute state than has ever existed before; and since it can no longer even count on the ancient religious piety towards the state but has, rather, involuntarily to work ceaselessly
for its abolition - because, that is, it works for the abolition of all existing
states - socialism itself can hope to exist only for brief periods here and
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
there, and then only through the exercise of the extremest terrorism. For
this reason it is secretly preparing  itself for rule through fear and is driving the word  'justice'  into the heads  of the  half-educated  masses like  a nail so as to rob  them of their reason (after this  said reason has already
greatly  suffered  from  exposure  to  their half-education)  and  to  create  in
them a good conscience for the evil game they are to play. - Socialism can
serve  to  teach,  in  a  truly  brutal  and  impressive  fashion,  what  danger
there  lies  in  all  accumulations  of  state  power,  and  to  that  extent  to
implant  mistrust  of  the  state  itself.  When  its  harsh  voice  takes  up  the
watchword 'as much state as possible' it thereby at first sounds noisier than
ever: but soon the opposite cry comes  through  with all the greater force:
'as little state as possible'.
The evolution of the spirit feared by the state. - Like every organizing political
power,  the  Greek  polis  was  mistrustful  of  the  growth  of  culture  and
sought almost exclusively to paralyse and inhibit it.  It wanted to admit no
history, no development in this  realm;  the education sanctioned by state
law was intended to be imposed upon every generation and  to rivet it to
one stage  of development. The same  thing was  later desired by Plato too
for  his  ideal state.  This  culture evolved in spite of the polis:  it assisted indirectly and against its will,  to be sure,  because the individual's thirst for honour  was  incited  to  the  highest  degree  in  the  polis,  so  that,  once
entered upon the path of spiritual cultivation, he continued along it as far
as  he  could  go.  On  the  other  hand,  one  should  not  invoke  the  glorificatory speech of Pericles: for it is no more than a grand,  optimistic illusion as  to the supposedly necessary connection between the polis and Athenian culture;  immediately before night descends on Athens (the plague and the rupture of tradition),  Thucydides makes it rise resplendent once
again,  like  a transfiguring evening glow  in whose  light  the evil day that
preceded it could be forgotten.
European  man  and  the abolition of nations.  - Trade  and  industry,  the  post
and the book-trade, the possession in common of all higher culture, rapid
changing of home and  scene,  the nomadic life  now  lived by all who  do
not own land - these circumstances are necessarily bringing with them a
weakening and finally an abolition  of nations,  at  least the European:  so
that  as a  consequence  of continual  crossing  a  mixed  race,  that of European man, must come into being out of them. This goal is at present being worked  against,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  by  the  separation  of
nations through the production of national hostilities, yet this mixing will
nonetheless  go  slowly  forward  in  spite  of  that  temporary  countercurrent:  this  artificial  nationalism  is in  any  case  as  perilous  as artificial Catholicism used  to be,  for it is in its essence a forcibly imposed state of
siege and self-defence inflicted on the many by the few and requires cunning,  force and falsehood to maintain a front of respectability. It is not the interests of the many  (the peoples), as is no doubt claimed, but above all
A  GLANCE  AT  THE  STATE
the interests of certain princely dynasties and of certain classes of business and society, that impel to this nationalism; once one has recognized this fact, one should not be afraid to proclaim oneself simply a good European  and  actively to work for  the  amalgamation of  nations:  wherein the Germans are,  through their ancient and  tested quality of being  the  interpreter and mediator between  peoples,  able  to be  of assistance.  - Incidentally:  the  entire  problem  of  the Jews exists  only  within  national  states, inasmuch as it is here that their energy and higher intelligence, their capital in will and spirit accumulated from generation to generation in a long school of suffering,  must come to preponderate to a degree calculated to
arouse envy and hatred, so that in almost every nation - and the more so
the more nationalist a posture the nation is again adopting - there is gaining  ground  the  literary  indecency of leading the Jews  to  the  sacrificial slaughter as  scapegoats  for every possible public or  private misfortune.
As soon as it is no longer a question of the conserving of nations but of the
production of the strongest possible European mixed race, the Jew will be
just as usable and  desirable as an ingredient of it as any other national
residue.  Every  nation,  every  man,  possesses  unpleasant,  indeed
dangerous qualities:  it is cruel to demand that the Jew should constitute
an exception. In him these qualities may even be dangerous and repellent
to an exceptional degree; and perhaps the youthful stock-exchange Jew is
the  most  repulsive  invention  of the  entire  human race.  Nonetheless  I
should like to know how much must, in a total accounting,  be forgiven a
people who,  not without  us all being to blame, have had the most griefladen history of any people and whom we have to thank for the noblest human being (Christ), the purest sage (Spinoza), the mightiest book and
the  most efficacious  moral  code in  the world.  Moreover:  in  the  darkest
periods of the Middle Ages, when the cloudbanks of Asia had settled low
over  Europe,  it  was  the  Jewish  freethinkers,  scholars  and  physicians
who, under the harshest personal constraint, held firmly to the banner of
enlightenment  and  intellectual  independence  and  defended  Europe
against Asia;  it  is  thanks not least  to  their efforts  that  a  more  natural,
rational and  in  any  event unmythical elucidation  of the  world  could  at
last again  obtain victory and the ring of culture that now unites us with
the  enlightenment  of  Graeco-Roman  antiquity  remain  unbroken.  If
Christianity has done everything to orientalize the occident, Judaism has
always played an essential part in occidentalizing it again: which in a certain sense means making of Europe's mission and history a continuation of the Greek.
Apparent superiority of the Middle Ages.  - The Middle Ages  exhibit in the
church an institution possessing a universal goal embracing all mankind,
and one that is supposedly concerned with mankind's highest interests:
contrasted  with  this,  the  goals  of  the  states  and  nations  exhibited  by
modern  history  produce  an  oppressive  impression;  they  appear  petty,
mean,  materialistic and spatially  limited.  But these varying impressions
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
upon  the  imagination  must  certainly  not  be  allowed  to determine  our
judgement; for that universal institution was designed  to meet artificial
needs  reposing on  fictions  which,  where  they  did  not  yet  exist,  it  was
obliged  to  invent  (need  of redemption);  the  modem  institutions  supply
remedies  for  real  states of distress;  and  the  time  is coming when  institutions will come into being to serve the true needs of all men and to cast their fantastic archetype,  the Catholic Church, into shadow and oblivion.
War indispensable. - It is vain reverie and beautiful-soulism to expect much
more  (let  alone  only  then  to  expect  much)  of  mankind  when  it  has
unlearned how to wage war. For the present we know of no other means
by  which  that  rude  energy  that  characterizes  the  camp,  that  profound
impersonal  hatred,  that  murderous  coldbloodedness  with  a  good  conscience,  that  common  fire  in  the  destruction  of  the  enemy,  that  proud indifference  to  great  losses,  to  one's  own  existence  and  that  of  one's
friends,  that inarticulate,  earthquake-like  shuddering of the  soul,  could
be communicated more surely or strongly than every great war communicates  them:  the streams  and  currents that here break forth,  though they carry with them rocks and rubbish of every kind and ruin the pastures of
tenderer  cultures,  will  later  under  favourable  circumstances  tum  the
wheels in the workshops of the spirit with newfound energy. Culture can
in no way do without passions, vices and  acts of wickedness. - When the
Romans of the  imperial era  had grown  a little  tired  of war  they  tried  to
gain  new  energy  through  animal-baiting,  gladiatorial  combats  and  the
persecution  of  Christians.  Present-day  Englishmen,  who  seem  also  on
the  whole  to  have  renounced  war,  seize  on  a  different  means  of  again
engendering their  fading energies: those perilous  journeys of discovery,
navigations,  mountain-climbings,  undertaken for scientific ends as they
claim,  in  truth  so  as  to  bring  home  with  them  superfluous  energy
acquired  through adventures  and  perils of all kinds.  One will be able  to
discover  many  other  such  surrogates  for  war,  but  they  will  perhaps
increasingly reveal that so highly cultivated and for that  reason  necessarily  feeble  humanity as that  of  the  present-day  European  requires  not merely  war  but  the  greatest  and  most  terrible  wars  - thus  a  temporary
relapse into barbarism - if the means to culture are not to deprive them of
their culture  and  of their existence  itself.
Industriousness  in  south  and  north.  - Industriousness  originates  in  two
quite different  ways.  Workmen in the south are industrious,  not from a
desire for gain, but because others are always in need.  Because someone
always comes along who wants a horse shod, a cart repaired, the smith is
always industrious.  If no one came along,  he would lounge about in the
market-place.  To  feed  himself  in  a  fruitful  country  requires  no  great
effort:  a very  moderate  amount of work will suffice,  in any event he has
no need for industriousness; ultimately he would be quite content to beg.
- The industriousness of English workers, on the other hand,  has behind
A  G L A N C E   AT  THE  STATE
it the sense for gain: it is aware of itself and of its objectives, and desires
with  possessions power,  with  power the greatest possible freedom and
individual nobility.
Wealth as the origin of a nobility of birth. - Wealth necessarily engenders an
aristocracy of race, for it permits one to select the fairest women,  pay the
best teachers, grants to a man cleanliness, time for physical exercises, and
above  all  freedom  from  deadening  physical  labour.  To  this  extent  it
creates  all the conditions  for the production over a  few generations  of
a  noble  and  fair  demeanour,  even  noble  and  fair  behaviour,  in  men:
greater freedom of feeling, the absence of the wretched and petty, of abasement before breadgivers, of penny-pinching. - It is precisely these negative qualities  that are  the  richest gifts  of happiness  for  a  young man;  a very poor man usually destroys himself through nobility of disposition, it
takes him nowhere and gains him nothing, his race is not capable of life.
What  must also be considered,  however,  is that wealth exercises almost
the  same  effects  whether one  has  300  or 3o,ooo talers a  year  to  spend:
there is no essential progression in favouring circumstances.  But to have
less,  as a  boy  to  beg and  abase  oneself,  is dreadful:  although  for  those
who  seek their happiness in the glitter of the court,  in subordination to
the powerful and influential,  or desire  to be  heads of the  church,  it may
well be the right starting-point. ( - It teaches one to steal stooping into the
casements of favour.)
Envy and  indolence  in different directions.  - The two opposing parties,  the
socialist  and  the  nationalist  - or  whatever  their  names  may  be  in  the
various  countries  of Europe - are worthy  of one  another:  envy and laziness are the moving forces in both of them. In the former camp they want to work as little as possible with their hands, in the latter as little as possible with their heads; in the latter they hate and envy the prominent, selfevolved  individuals  unwilling  to  let themselves be  enlisted  in the ranks for  the  production of a  mass effect, in  the  former the better,  outwardly
more  favoured  caste  of  society  whose  real  task,  the  production  of the
supreme cultural values,  makes their inner life so much harder and more
painful.  If,  to  be  sure,  the  nationalists  should  succeed  in  imposing  the
spirit of the mass effect upon the higher classes of society, then the socialist hordes  would  be  quite justified  in  seeking  to  level them  with  themselves also outwardly, since they would already be level with one another in  head  and  heart.  - Live  as  higher  men and  perform  perpetually  the
deeds  of higher culture - to  this all that lives admits  your right,  and the
order of society whose summit you are will be proof against every evil eye
and evil claw!
Grand  politics  and what they  cost.  - Just  as  the  greatest  cost  to  a  people
involved in war and preparation for war is not the expense of the war or
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
the interruption to trade and commerce, nor the maintenance of standing
armies - however great these expenses may be  now  that eight states of
Europe expend between  two and three  milliards  annually on it - but the
cost involved in the removal year in, year out of an extraordinary number
of  its  efficient  and  industrious  men  from  their  proper  professions  and
occupations  so  that  they  may  become  soldiers:  so  a  people  which  sets
about  practising  grand  politics  and  ensuring  to  itself  a  decisive  voice
among the  most  powerful states  does  not  incur  the highest costs where
these are usually thought to lie.  It is true that from this moment on a host
of the  most prominent talents  are continually  sacrificed  on  the  'altar  of
the  fatherland'  or of the  national  thirst  for  honour,  whereas previously
other  spheres  of activity  were  open  to  these  talents  now  devoured  by
politics.  But  aside  from  these  public  hecatombs,  and  at  bottom  much
more  horrible,  there  occurs  a  spectacle  played  out  continually  in  a
hundred thousand simultaneous acts: every efficient, industrious, intelligent,  energetic  man  belonging  to  such  a  people  lusting  after  political laurels  is  dominated  by  this  lust  and  no  longer  belongs  wholly  to  his
own domain,  as he formerly did: questions and cares of the public weal,
renewed  every day,  devour a  daily tribute from the capital in every citizen's head and heart: the sum total of all these sacrifices and costs in individual energy and work is so tremendous that the political emergence of a people  almost necessarily draws  after it a  spiritual impoverishment and
enfeeblement and a diminution of the capacity for undertakings demanding great concentration and  application.  Finally  one  may ask:  is all this inflorescence and pomp of the whole (which is, after all, apparent only in
the fear of other  states  for the new colossus and in the more favourable
terms  for trade  and  travel  extorted  from  them)  worth it, if all the nobler,
tenderer,  more  spiritual  plants  and  growths  in  which  its  soil  was  previously so rich have to be sacrificed to this coarse and gaudy flower of the nation?
And to repeat. - Public opinions - private indolence.
MAN
ALONE WITH
HIMSELF
Enemies of truth. - Convictions are more dangerous enemies of truth than
lies.
Upside down  world.  - One  criticizes  a  thinker  more  severely  when  he
advances  a  proposition  we  find  unpleasing;  and  yet  it  would  be  more
reasonable to do so when his proposition pleases us.
Full  of character.  - A  man  appears  full  of  character  much  more  often
because he always obeys his temperament than because he always obeys
his principles.
The one thing needful. - There is one thing one has to have: either a cheerful
disposition by nature or a disposition made cheerful by art and knowledge.
Passion for causes. - He who directs his passion upon causes (the sciences,
the  common  weal,  cultural  interests,  the  arts)  deprives  his  passion  for
people (even when they are advocates of these causes, as statesmen, philosophers, artists are advocates of their creations) of much of its fire.
Composure in action. - Just  as  a waterfall  grows  slower  and  more  lightly
suspended as it  plunges  down,  so  the  great man of action usually acts
with greater composure than the fierceness of his desires before he acted
had led us to expect.
4b9
Not too deep. - People who comprehend  a  thing to its very depths rarely
stay faithful to it for ever.  For they have brought its depths  into the light
of day: and in the depths there is always  much that is unpleasant to see.
Delusion of the idealists. - All idealists imagine that the  causes  they  serve
are essentially better than all the other causes in the world and refuse to
believe that,  if  their  cause  is  to  prosper at all,  it requires  precisely  the
same  evil-smelling  manure  as all other  human  undertakings  have need
of.
Self-observation.  - Man  is  very  well  defended  against  himself,  against
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
being reconnoitred and besieged by himself, he is usually able to perceive
of himself only his outer walls. The actual fortress is inaccessible, even invisible to him, unless his friends and enemies play the traitor and conduct him in by a secret path.
The right profession. - Men can rarely endure a profession of which they do
not believe  or convince  themselves it is  at bottom more important than
any other.  Women adopt a similar attitude towards their lovers.
Nobility  of  mind.  - Nobility of  mind  consists  to  a great degree  in  good-
naturedness  and  absence  of  distrust,  and  thus  contains  precisely  that
which successful and money-hungry people are so fond of looking down
on and laughing at.
Goal and path. - Many are obstinate with regard to the path once they have
entered upon it,  few with regard to the goal.
What  excites  indignation  in  an  individual way of life.  - All very individual
rules of life excite hostility against him who adopts  them;  other people
feel  humiliated  by  the  exceptional  treatment  he  accords  himself,  as
though they were being treated as merely commonplace creatures.
Privilege of greatness. - It is the privilege of greatness to give great delight
with meagre gifts.
Involuntarily noble. - Man involuntarily conducts himself nobly when he
has become accustomed to desiring nothing of men and always bestowing gifts upon them.
Condition for heroism. - If a man wants to become a hero the serpent must
first have become a dragon: otherwise he will lack his proper enemy.
Friend.  - Fellow  rejoicing  [Mitfreude],  not  fellow  suffering  [Mitleiden],
makes the friend.
Employing ebb and flow. - To the ends of knowledge one must know how to
employ that internal current that draws us to a thing and then that other
current that after a time draws us away from it.
Pleasure  in  oneself.  - One  says  'pleasure  in  a  thing':  but in  reality  it  is
pleasure in oneself by means of a thing.
t8o
M A N  A L O N E  WITH  H I M SE L F
The  modest  man.  - He  who  comports  himself  modestly  in  relation  to
people  is  all  the  more  presumptuous  in  relation  to  things  (city,  state,
society, the age,  mankind). This constitutes his revenge.
Envy and jealousy. - Envy and jealousy  are the privy parts of the human
soul. The comparison can perhaps be extended.
The noblest hypocrite. - Never to speak about oneself is a very noble piece
of hypocrisy.
Ill-humour.  - Ill-humour  is  a  physical  illness  that  is by  no  means  done
away with if the occasion for ill-humour is subsequently abolished.
so6
Advocates of truth. - Not when  it is dangerous to tell the truth does  truth
lack advocates, but when it is boring to do so.
More troublesome than enemies. - People who we are not convinced would
be  sympathetically  inclined  towards  us  under  all  circumstances  but  to
whom  we  are  for  any  reason  (e.g.  gratitude)  on  our  part  obligated  to
maintain the appearance of unconditional sympathy torment our imagination much more than our enemies do.
soB
The open countryside. - We enjoy being in the  open  countryside so much
because it has no opinion concerning us.
Everyone superior in one thing. - Under civilized conditions everyone feels
himself to be superior to everyone else in at any rate one thing: it is upon
this  that the  general  mutual goodwill  that exists  depends,  inasmuch  as
everyone is someone who under certain circumstances is able to be helpful and who thus feels free to accept help without a sense of shame.
Grounds of consolation. - When somebody dies one needs grounds of consolation most of all not so much to assuage  one's  grief as to provide an excuse for the fact that one is so easily consoled.
Those faithful to their convictions. - He who has much  to do preserves his
general opinions and points of view almost unaltered.  Likewise anyone
who works in  the  service  of an idea:  he  will  cease  to  examine  even the
idea itself, for he has no time for that; indeed it is against his interests to
regard it as so much as discussable.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
Morality  and quantity.  - One  man's  morality  is  higher  compared  with
another's often only because its goals are quantitavely greater.  The latter
is drawn down by his  narrowly bounded occupation with the petty.
Life as the yield of life. - No matter how far a man may extend himself with
his knowledge, no matter how objectively he may come to view himself,
in the end it can yield  to him  nothing but his own biography.
Iron  necessity.  - Iron  necessity  is  a  thing  which  in  the  course  of history
men come to see as  neither iron nor necessary.
From experience.  - The  irrationality of a  thing  is  no  argument  against its
existence,  rather a condition of it.
Truth. - No one now dies of fatal truths: there are too many antidotes to
them.
Fundamental insight. - There is no pre-established harmony• between the
furtherance of truth  and  the well-being of mankind.
The human lot. - He who considers more deeply knows that, whatever his
acts and judgements may be,  he is always wrong.
Truth as Circe. - Error has  transformed animals into men; is truth perhaps
capable of changing man back into an animal?
Danger facing our culture. - We belong to an  age whose culture is in danger
of perishing through the means to culture.
Greatness means giving direction. - No river is great and abundant of itself:
it  is  the  fact  that  it  receives  and bears  onward  so many  tributaries  that
makes it so.  Thus it is too with all great men of the spirit.  All that matters
is that one supplies the direction which many inflowing tributaries then
have to follow,  not whether one is poorly or richly gifted from the beginning.
Feeble  conscience.  - People  who  speak  of  their  own  significance  for  humanity possess with regard to common, bourgeois integrity, in the keeping of compacts  and  promises, a feeble conscience.
•  pre-established  harmony:  Leibnitz"s  conception  of  the  world  as  composed  of  monads,
individuals whose relations of mutual  agreement are predetermined by God.
M A N  A L O N E   W I T H   H I M SE L F
Wanting to be loved. - The demand to be loved is the greatest of all pieces of
presumption.
Contempt of man.  - The  most  unambiguous  sign  that  one  holds  men  in
contempt is  this,  that one  acknowledges  them only as a  means to one's
own ends or does not acknowledge them at all.
Adherents  out  of contradictoriness.  - He  who  has  raised  men  up  in  rage
against him has always  gained a party in his favour too.
Forgetting  experiences.  - He  who  thinks  a  great  deal,  and  thinks  objectively, can easily forget his own experiences, but not the thoughts these experiences called forth.
Retaining an opinion. - One person  retains an opinion  because he flatters
himself  it  was  his  own  discovery,  another  because  he  acquired  it  with
effort and is proud of having  grasped  it:  thus both do so out of vanity.
Shunning  the  light.  - The  good  deed  shuns  the  light just  as  fearfully  as
does the bad deed:  the latter fears that detection will bring pain (in the
form  of punishment),  the  former  fears  that  detection  will  bring  loss  of
pleasure  (namely  that pure  pleasure  in  oneself  that ceases  immediately
vanity is satisfied).
The length of the day. - When one has a great deal to put into it a day has a
hundred pockets.
Genius of tyranny. - When there is alive in the soul an invincible desire for
tyrannical  rule,  and  the  fire  is  constantly  being  fuelled,  even  a  modest
talent (in politicians, artists) will gradually become an almost irresistible
natural force.
The life of one's enemy. - He who lives for the sake of combating an enemy
has an interest in seeing that his enemy  stays alive.
More  seriously.  - One  takes  an  obscure  and  inexplicable  thing  more
seriously than a clear and explicable one.
Evaluation  of  services  rendered.  - We  value  services  anyone  renders  us
according to the worth he places upon them, not according to the value
they possess for us.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
Misfortune. - The distinction bestowed by misfortune (as though to feel
lucky were a sign of shallowness, unpretentiousness, commonplaceness)
is so great that when anyone is told:  'but how lucky you are!'  he usually
protests.
Chimera of fear. - The chimera of fear is that evil, apish kobold who leaps
on  to the back of man at precisely the moment he is already bearing the
heaviest burden.
Value of tasteless opponents. - Sometimes one stays faithful to a cause only
because its opponents are unfailingly tasteless.
Value of a profession. - A profession makes one thoughtless, therein lies its
greatest  blessing.  For  it  is  a  rampart  behind  which  one  can  lawfully
retreat when one is assailed by commonplace cares and scruples.
Talent. - The talent of many a man appears less than it is because he has
always set himself too great tasks.
Youth. - Youth is unpleasant; for in youth it is not possible or not sensible
to be productive, in any sense of the word.
Too great objectives. - He who has publicly set himself great objectives and
afterwards  realizes  he  is  too  weak  for  them  is  usually  also  too  weak
publicly  to  repudiate  them,  and  then  he  unavoidably becomes a  hypocrite.
In  the stream. - Mighty waters  draw much  stone  and rubble along with
them,  mighty  spirits many stupid and bewildered heads.
Perils  of  spiritual  liberation.  - When  a  man  is  seriously  engaged  upon
liberating  himself  spiritually  his  desires  and  passions  as  well  hope  to
derive some advantage from it.
Embodiment of the spirit. - When we think much and sagaciously not only
our face but our body too assumes a sagacious appearance.
Seeing badly and listening badly. - He who sees badly sees less and less; he
who listens badly hears more than has been said.
M A N  A L O N E  W I T H   H I M SE LF
Self-enjoyment in vanity. - The vain  man wants not so much to predominate as to feel himself predominant; that is why he disdains no means of self-deception and self-outwitting.  What he treasures is not the opinion
of others but his own opinion of their opinion.
Vain exceptionally. - He who is usually self-sufficient is vain and receptive
to fame and commendation on exceptional occasions,  namely when he is
physically ill. To the extent that he feels himself diminishing he has to try
to recoup himself from outside through the opinion of others.
The 'rich in spirit'. - He has no spirit who seeks spirit.
Hint for party leaders.  - If you can bring people to declare  themselves  in
favour  of  something  publicly  you  have  usually  also  brought  them  to
declare themselves  in favour of it inwardly;  they want to be regarded as
consistent.
Contempt. - Contempt  gained  through  others  is  more  painful  to  a  man
than contempt gained through himself.
Cord of gratitude.  - There  are  slavish souls who go so far in readiness  to
acknowledge  favours  done  them  that  they  choke  themselves  with  the
cord of gratitude.
Trick of  the prophet. - To divine in  advance  how ordinary people will act
one has  to  assume that,  when they are in an  unpleasant situation,  they
always seek to get out of it with the smallest expenditure of intelligence.
The only human right. - He who deviates from the traditional falls victim to
the extraordinary; he who remains in the traditional becomes its slave. In
either event he perishes.
Lower  than  the animal.  - When  man  neighs  with laughter he excels any
animal in his vulgarity.
Half-knowledge.  - He  who  speaks  little  of a  foreign language  gets  more
pleasure from it than he who speaks it well.  Enjoyment is with the halfknowers.
Dangerous readiness  to help.  - There are people  who want to make other
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
people's life harder for no other reason than to be able afterwards to offer
them their recipe  for alleviating life (for example  their Christianity).
Industriousness and conscientiousness. - Industriousness and conscientiousness are often at odds with one another because industriousness wants to pluck the  fruit  from  the  tree  while it is  sour  whereas conscientiousness
lets it hang too long until it falls and smashes itself to pieces.
Casting suspicion. - Upon people  one  cannot endure one seeks in one's
own mind to cast suspicion.
No occasion. - Many people wait their whole life long for an opportunity of
being good in their fashion.
Lack of friends. - A lack of friends may be put down to envy or presump-
tion.  Many owe their friends only to the fortunate circumstance that they
have no occasion for envy.
Danger  in  multiplicity.  - With  one  talent  more  one  often  stands  less  securely than  with one fewer: as a table stands better on  three  than  on four legs.
A model for others.  - He  who wants to give a  good  example must add a
grain of folly to his  virtue;  then others will imitate and at the same  time
surpass him  they imitate - which  men love to do.
Being  a target. - Unkind remarks about us by others are  often  not  really
directed  at us but are an expression of an annoyance, of an ill-humour of
quite a different origin.
Easily resigned.  - One  suffers  little  from  disappointed  wishes  if one  has
trained one's imagination to blacken the past.
In danger. - One is  most  in  danger  of being run over when one has just
avoided a carriage.
The role suited to the voice. - He who is compelled to speak louder than he is
used  to  speaking  (to  a  half-deaf person,  for  instance,  or before a  great
auditorium)  usually  exaggerates  the  things  he  has  to  say.  - Many  a
person has become a conspirator, a malicious gossip, an intriguer,  simply
because  his voice is best suited to whispering.
M A N  A L O N E   W I T H   H I M SE L F
Love and  hatred. - Love  and  hatred  are  not  blind  but  dazzled by the  fire
they  themselves bear  with them.
Advantageous enmity. - People unable to make the world see them at their
true worth seek to arouse violent enmity towards themselves. They then
have  the  consolation  of  thinking  that  this  enmity  is  standing  between
their true worth and recognition of it - and that many others suppose the
same: which is very advantageous for their reputation.
Confession .  - One  forgets  one's  sins  when  one  has  confessed  them  to
another,  but  the  other does not  usually forget them.
Self-satisfaction.  - The  golden  fleece  of  self-satisfaction  protects  against
blows but not against pinpricks.
Shadows in the flame.  - The flame is not as bright to itself as it is to those it
illumines: so too the sage.
Our own opinions. - The first opinion  that occurs to us when we are suddenly asked about something is usually not our own but only the customary one pertaining to our caste,  station,  origin; our own  opinions rarely swim to the  top.
Origin of courage. - The ordinary man is as courageous and invulnerable as
a hero when he does not perceive the danger and has no eyes for it.  Conversely: the hero's only vulnerable spot is on his back, that is to say where he has no eyes.
Danger in one's physician. - One must have the physician one was born for,
otherwise one will perish by one's physician.
Miraculous vanity. - He who has boldly  foretold  the weather three  times
and each time successfully believes a little in the depths of his soul that he
is prophetically gifted. We accept  the existence of the miraculous and  irrational when it flatters our self-esteem.
Profession. - A profession is the backbone of life.
Danger  in  personal  influence.  - He  who  feels  he  exercises  a  great  inner
influence  upon another has to allow him entirely free  rein,  occasionally
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
indeed be glad to see resistance in him and even induce it: otherwise he
will inevitably make for himself an enemy.
Acknowledging heirs. - He who has founded  something great in a selfless
attitude of mind takes pains to rear heirs for himself. To see an opponent
in every  possible  heir of one's work and  to live in a state of self-defence
against them is a sign of a tyrannical and  ignoble nature.
Half-knowledge.  - Half-knowledge is  more victorious  than whole knowledge: it understands  things as being more simple than  they are and  this renders its opinions more  easily  intelligible  and more convincing.
Not suited to be a party man. - He who thinks a great deal is not suited to be
a  party  man: he thinks his  way  through  the party  and out the other side
too soon.
Bad memory. - The  advantage of a bad memory is that one  can  enjoy the
same  good  things  for the first time several times.
Causing  oneself pain.  - Ruthlessness  in  thinking  is  often  the  sign  of  a
discordant inner disposition that desires insensitizing.
Martyr. - A martyr's disciples suffer more  than the martyr.
Vanity behind the times. - The vanity of many people who have no need to
be vain  is a  habit,  retained  and  exaggerated,  from a time when they did
not yet have the right to believe in themselves and had first to beg for this
belief from others in small coinage.
Punctum saliens of passion. * - He who is on the point of getting into a rage
or a violent attack of love  reaches a point at which the  soul  is as  full as a
vessel:  but one drop of water  has  still to be added, an  assent  to passion
(which is  something one  usually  dissents  from).  Only  this little  drop is
needed and then the vessel runs over.
Ill-humoured reflections. - It is  with  men as with the charcoal-kilns in the
forest.  Only when the young have ceased to glow and are carbonized do
they become useful. As long as they are smoking and smouldering they
may  perhaps be more interesting but they are of no use and all too often
unmanageable.  - Mankind  mercilessly  employs  every  individual  as
material for heating its  great  machines:  but  what  then is the  purpose  of
the machines if all individuals (that is to say mankind) are of no other use
•  punctum saliens: salient point
t88
M A N   A L O N E   W I T H  H I M SE L F
than as material for maintaining them? Machines that are an end in themselves - is that the umana commedia?
Of the hour-hand of life. - Life  consists of rare  individual moments of the
highest  significance  and  countless  intervals  in  which  at  best  the  phantoms of those moments hover about us. Love, spring, a beautiful melody, the mountains, the moon,  the sea - they all speak truly to our heart only
once: if they ever do in fact truly find speech. For many people never experience these moments at all but are themselves intervals and pauses in the symphony of real life.
To attack or to intervene. - We often make the mistake of actively opposing
a tendency or party or age because we happen to have seen only its external side, its deliquescence or the 'faults of its virfues' necessarily adhering to  it  - perhaps  because  we  ourselves  have  participated  in  them  to  a
marked degree.  Then we turn our back on them and go off in an opposite
direction; but it  would be better if we  sought out their good and strong
side instead or evolved and developed it in ourself. It requires, to be sure,
a  more  penetrating  eye  and  a  more  favourable  inclination  to  advance
what is imperfect and evolving than to see through it in its imperfection
and deny it.
Modesty. - There  is  true  modesty (that is,  the  recognition  that we are not
the work of ourselves); and it well becomes the great mind because it is
precisely  he  who  can  grasp  the idea  of  his  complete  unaccountability
(also for the good he creates). One hates the immodesty of the great man,
not to the extent that it comes from a sensation of his own strength, but
because through it he evidences a desire to experience this strength by
wounding others,  treating them in a  domineering way and seeing how
far they will put up with it.  As a rule this behaviour is even a sign that he
lacks  a  calm  certainty of his  strength  and  thus  leads  men  to  doubt  his
greatness.  To  this extent immodesty is from a  prudential point of view
very inadvisable.
The first thought of the day. - The best way of beginning each day well is to
think on awakening whether one cannot this day give pleasure to at any
rate one person. If this could count as a substitute for the religious practice
of prayer,  then this  substitution would  be to the benefit of one's fellow
men.
Presumption as the last means of comfort. - When we interpret a misfortune,
our intellectual shortcomings or an  illness  in such a  way that we see in
them our prescribed  destiny,  a  testing or a  secret punishment for past
actions, we make our own being interesting to ourselves and in our own
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
imagination raise ourselves above our fellow men. The proud sinner is a
familiar figure in all ecclesiastical sects.
Vegetation of happiness.  - Close  beside  the  woe  of  the  world,  and  often
upon  its  volcanic  soil,  man  has  laid  out  his  little  garden  of  happiness.
Whether one views life with the eye of him who desires of existence only
knowledge,  or  of  him  who  submits  and  is  resigned,  or  of  him  who
rejoices over difficulties overcome - everywhere one will find a little happiness  sprung  up  beside  the  misfortune - and  the  more  happiness  the more  volcanic the  soil - only it  would be ludicrous to say that with this
happiness suffering itself is justified.
The road of one's forebears. - It is sensible for anyone to develop further in
himself the talent upon which his father and grandfather expended effort
and not to turn  to something completely new, otherwise he will  make it
impossible  for  himself  to  achieve  perfection  in  any  trade  at  all.  That  is
why  the  proverb  says:  'What  road  should  you take? - the  road  of your
forebears. '
Vanity and ambition as education. - So long as a man has not yet become an
instrument of general  human utility  let  him be  plagued by  ambition;  if
that goal has been attained,  however,  if he is working with the necessity
of a machine for the good  of all,  then let him be visited by vanity; it will
humanize him and make him more sociable,  endurable and indulgent in
small  things,  now  that  ambition  (to  render  him  useful)  has  finished
roughhewing him.
Philosophical novices. - If we have just become the recipient of the wisdom
of a philosopher we walk along the street feeling we have been recreated
and become a great man; for we encounter only people who are unaware
of this wisdom  and  have therefore to deliver a new, so far unknown verdict on all things: because we acknowledge a code of law we think we are henceforth obliged  to bear ourselves like a judge.
Pleasing by displeasing.  - People who  prefer  to  draw attention  to  them-
selves and  thereby cause displeasure desire the same thing as those who
want not to draw attention to themselves and give pleasure, only they do
so  to  a  far  greater  degree  and  indirectly,  by  means  of a  state  through
which  they  appear to  be  retreating  from  their  goal.  They  desire  power
and influence, and  therefore demonstrate their superiority even in a way
that  makes  them  unpleasing;  for  they  know  that  he  who  has  finally
attained  to power  pleases  in almost  all he  does and says,  and that even
when he causes displeasure he still seems to please. - The free spirit too,
and  likewise  the  believer,  desire  power  in  order  to  please  through  it;
M A N  A L O N E  WITH  H I M SE L F
when  they are  threatened by an ill fate,  persecution,  imprisonment,  execution on  account of their teaching  they  rejoice  in the  thought  that in this way their teaching will be cut and burned into mankind; they accept
it as a painful but vigorous,  if late-acting means of nonetheless attaining
to power.
Casus belli and the like. • - The prince who, having resolved on war with his
neighbour, discovers a casus belli, is like a father who foists upon his child
a  mother  who  is  henceforth  to  count  as  such.  And  are  almost  all  the
publicly declared motives for our actions not such substituted mothers?
Passion and rights. - No one talks more passionately about his rights than
he who in the depths of his soul doubts whether he has any.  By enlisting
passion on his side he wants to  stifle his reason and its doubts:  thus he
will acquire a good conscience and with it success among his fellow men.
Trick of renouncers. - He who protests  against marriage, in the way Catholic priests do,  will try to  think of it  in  its lowest and most vulgar form.
Likewise  he  who  refuses  to  be  honoured  by  his  contemporaries  will
understand  the  concept in  a  base  sense;  thus  he  will  render  this  selfdenial  and  the  struggle  against  it  easier  for  himself.  In general he who denies himself much in things of importance will tend to permit himself
petty  indulgences.  It  may  be  possible  that  he  who  is  raised  above  the
applause of his contemporaries is nonetheless incapable of denying himself the satisfaction of little vanities.
Age of presumption. - With gifted people the actual period of presumption
lies between their twenty-sixth and thirtieth years; it is the time of their
first  maturity,  with  a  strong  residue  of  acidulousness.  On  the  basis  of
what  they feel within  them  they demand  honour and  humility  of  men
who  see little or  nothing of it,  and when  these are at  first denied  them
they revenge themselves  with  that  presumptuous  glance  and  bearing,
that tone of voice which a subtle ear and eye can recognize in every product  of  that  age,  whether  it  be  poetry,  philosophy,  pictures  or  music.
Older, more experienced men smile at this, and recall with emotion that
fair time of life in which one is angry that it is one's fate to be so much and
seem so little. Later one really does appear more - but one has by then lost
the belief that one is very much: one then remains an incorrigible fool of
vanity for the rest of one's life.
6oo
Deceptive and yet tenable. - Just as in order to walk beside an abyss or cross
a deep stream by a plank one needs a railing, not so as to hold on to it - for
it would at once collapse if one did that - but to give to the eye a feeling of
•  casus belli: motive for war
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
security,  so as a youth one has need  of people who without knowing it
perform for us the service of a railing.  It is true that, if we were really in
great danger,  they would  not help us if we  sought to rely on them,  but
they give us the  quieting sensation that there is protection close at hand
(for example  fathers,  teachers,  friends,  as all three usually are).
Learning to love. - We have to learn to love, learn to be charitable, and this
from our youth  up;  if education  and chance offer us  no opportunity to
practise these sensations our soul will grow dry and even incapable of understanding  them  in  others.  Hatred  likewise  has  to  be  learned  and nourished  if one  wants  to  become a  good hater: otherwise the germ of
that too will gradually wither away.
6o2
Ruins  as  ornamentation.  - Those  who  go  on  many  intellectual  journeys
retain certain outlooks and habits belonging to earlier ages,  which then
intrude into their modern thoughts and actions like a piece of inexplicable
antiquity  and  grey  stonework:  often  to  the  embellishment of the whole
region.
6o)
Love and  honour. - Love  desires,  fear shuns.  That is why one cannot be
loved and honoured by one and the same person, at least not at the same
time.  For he  who  honours  recognizes  power,  that  is  to  say he  fears  it.
Love, however,  recognizes  no power, nothing that separates, contrasts,
ranks above  and below.  Because  love  does not honour,  ambitious  men
are,  secretly or openly,  recalcitrant towards being loved.
6o4
Prejudice in favour of the cold. - People who catch fire quickly, quickly grow
cold and are thus on the whole unreliable. That is why all those who are
always  cold,  or pretend to be  so,  have in their favour the prejudice that
they are  particularly  trustworthy and reliable:  people confuse them with
those who catch fire slowly and retain it a long time.
6o5
What is dangerous in independent opinions - Occasional indulgence in independent opinions is stimulating,  like a kind of itch; if we proceed further in them we begin to scratch the spot; until in the end we produce an open
wound, that is to say until our independent opinions begin to disturb and
harass us in our situation in life and our human relationships.
6o6
Thirst for profound pain.  - When it has  passed,  passion leaves behind an
obscure longing for itself and even in departing casts a seductive glance.
To be scourged by it must have afforded us a kind of joy. The milder sensations,  on the other hand,  appear insipid; it seems we always prefer the more vehement displeasure to a feeble pleasure.
M A N   A L O N E  W I T H   H I M S E L F
6o7
Ill-humour with others and with the world.  - When,  as we so often  do,  we
expend our ill-humour on others while it is really against ourselves  that
we  feel  it,  what  we  are  doing  at bottom  is endeavouring  to  befog  and
deceive  our  own  judgement:  we  want  to  motivate  this  ill-humour  a
posteriori through  the  blunders  and  deficiencies  of others  and  thus  lose
sight of ourselves. - Those rigorously religious people who are inexorable
judges  of themselves  have  at  the  same  time  been  the  most  vehement
accusers of mankind in general:  the saint has never lived who reserved
sin for himself and virtue for others:  just as little as has the man who, following Buddha's prescript,  has concealed his good  from the people and let his evil alone shine forth.
6o8
Cause confused with effect. - We unconsciously seek for the principles and
dogmas appropriate to our temperament, so that in the end it appears as
though these principles and dogmas had �:rea ted our character and given
it firmness and  assurance:  whereas  what has  happened  is precisely  the
reverse. Our thinking and judgement are, it seems,  to be made the cause
of our nature: but in fact it is our nature that is the cause of our thinking
and judging thus and  thus.  - And what is it destines us for this  almost
unconscious comedy? Indolence and love of ease and not least the desire
of  our  vanity  to  be  thought  consistent  through  and  through,  homogeneous  in  thought  and  being:  for  this  procures  respect  and  bestows confidence and power.
Age and  truth. - Young  people  love  what  is  strange  and  interesting,  re-
gardless of whether it is true or  false.  More  mature  spirits love in truth
that which  is strange  and interesting in  it.  Heads  fully  mature,  finally,
love  truth also where it appears plain and  simple and is boring to  ordinary  people:  they  have  noticed  that  truth  is  accustomed  to  impart  its highest spiritual possessions with an air of simplicity.
Men as bad poets. - Just as in the second half of a stanza bad poets seek the
idea that will fit the rhyme,  so  men are  in the second  half of life accustomed to become more anxious to seek actions,  positions,  relationships suited to those of their earlier life,  so that externally it all sounds in harmony: but their life is no longer dominated and repeatedly directed by a powerful idea,  in place of which there appears the objective of finding a
rhyme.
Boredom and play. - Need compels us to perform work with the proceeds
of which the need is assuaged; need  continually  recurs and we are thus
accustomed  to  working.  In  the  intervals,  however,  during  which  our
needs have been assuaged and are as it were sleeping, we are overtaken
by  boredom.  What is  this?  It is our habituation to  work as such,  which
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O   H U M A N
now asserts itself as a  new,  additional need; and  the  more  strongly habituated  we  are  to  working,  perhaps  even  the  more  we  have  suffered need,  the  stronger  this  new need will be.  To  elude boredom man either
works  harder  than  is  required  to  satisfy  his  other  needs  or  he  invents
play, that is to say work designed to assuage no other need than the need
for work as such.  He who has become tired of play, and who has no fresh
needs that require him to work,  is sometimes overtaken by a longing for a
third condition which stands in the same relation to play as floating does
to dancing and dancing to walking - for a state of serene agitation: it is the
artist's and philosopher's vision  of happiness.
Instruction from  pictures.  - When  we regard  a  series  of pictures  of ourselves from our late childhood to our mature manhood, we are pleasantly surprised  to  see  that  the  man resembles the child  more  closely than he
does  the youth: what this  process probably indicates is that a temporary
alienation  from  our  basic  character  occurred  during  our  youth  but  has
been  overcome  by  the  accumulated  strength  of  manhood.  This  observation  is  consistent  with  this  other,  that  all  those  powerful  influences exerted upon us in our youth by our passions and by theories and political events seem later on to be again reduced back to a firm basis, so that, although  they certainly continue to live  on in us and affect our actions,
our fundamental feelings and outlook have come to dominate them and,
while we continue  to employ them as sources of energy,  they no longer
regulate us as they did in our twenties. Thus the thinking and feelings of
the  man are  likewise  more  conformable  to those of his childhood - and
this inward fact is expressed in the external one referred to.
Age and  tone of voice.  - The  tone  in which  young people  speak,  praise,
blame, poetize displeases their elders because it is too loud and yet at the
same time hollow and indistinct, like a sound in a vault that acquires such
volume  through  the  emptiness  surrounding  it;  for most of what young
people  think does  not proceed from the abundance of their own nature
but is a resonance and echo of what has been thought,  said, praised and
blamed in  their presence.  But because  sensations  (inclination and aversion) resound in them much more strongly than do the reasons for them, when  they  again  give  vent  to  these  sensations  there  arises  that  hollow,
resonant  tone  through  which  one can  recognize  the absence or sparseness  of  reasons.  The  tone  of  more  mature  years  is  stern,  abrupt,  of moderate  loudness  but,  like  everything  clearly  articulated,  very  farcarrying.  Old  age,  finally,  often  introduces a certain  gentleness and forbearance into the voice and as  it were  sweetens  it:  in  many cases,  to be sure,  it also sours it.
Retarded and anticipatory men. - The  unpleasant character who is  full  of
mistrust,  consumed  with  envy  whenever  competitors  or  neighbours
M A N   A L O N E   WITH  H I MS E L F
achieve  a  success,  and  violently  opposes  all  opinions  not  his  own,
demonstrates that he belongs to an earlier stage of culture and is  thus a
relic: for the way in which he traffics with men was the apt and right one
for conditions obtaining during an age of club-law; he is a  retarded man.
Another character who readily rejoices with his fellow men, wins friends
everywhere,  welcomes  everything new and  developing,  takes  pleasure
in the  honours and successes of others and makes no  claim to be in  the
sole possession of the truth but is full of a diffident mistrust - he is an anticipatory man striving towards a higher human culture.  The unpleasant character derives from ages when the rude foundations of human intercourse had still to be constructed, the other dwells on its highest floor as far removed as possible from the savage beast which, locked in the cellars
beneath the foundations of culture, howls and rages.
Comfort for hypochondriacs. - Whenever a great thinker is temporarily subject  to  hypochondriac  self-torments  he  may  comfort  himself  with  the words: 'it is your own great strength upon which this parasite is feeding;
if  it  were  less  you  would  suffer less'.  The  statesman  may  do  the  same
whenever  jealousy  and  feelings  of revengefulness,  the  mood  of bellum
omnium contra omnes• in general for which as representative of a nation he
must  necessarily  have  a  decided  gift,  intrudes  into  his  private life and
makes it hard for him.
Estranged  from  the  present.  - There  is  great  advantage  to  be  gained  in
distantly estranging ourselves from our age and for once being driven as
it were away from its shores back on to the ocean of the world-outlooks of
the past.  Looking back at  the  coast  from  this  distance  we  command  a
view,  no doubt for the first time, of its total configuration,  and when we
approach it again we have the advantage of understanding it better as a
whole than those who have never left it.
Sowing and reaping with one's personal shortcomings.  - Men like  Rousseau
know how to employ their weaknesses,  deficiencies and vices as it were
as manure for their talents.  If he bewails the depravity and degeneration
of  society  as the  deplorable  consequence  of culture,  he  does  so on  the
basis of a personal experience; it is the bitterness deriving from this that
gives to his general condemnation the sharpness of its edge and poisons
the arrows with which he shoots; he unburdens himself first of all as an
individual and thinks to seek a cure that, operating directly upon society,
will indirectly and through society also be of benefit to him himself.
Being philosophically  minded.  - We usually  endeavour to acquire  a  single
deportment of feeling, a single attitude of mind towards all the events and
situations of life - that above all is what is called being philosophically
•  bellum . . .  omnes: 'war of all against all'; Hobbes' phrase.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
minded. But for the enrichment of knowledge it may be of more value not
to  reduce  oneself  to  uniformity  in  this  way,  but to  listen instead to the
gentle  voice  of each  of life's  different  situations;  these  will  suggest  the
attitude of mind appropriate to them. Through thus ceasing to treat oneself as a single rigid and  unchanging individuum one takes an intelligent interest in the life and being of many others.
In the fire of contempt. - It is a new step towards independence when first
we venture to express views regarded as disgraceful in him who harbours
them; even our friends and acquaintances then begin to worry. The gifted
nature  must pass  through  this fire too; after it has done so it will belong
much more to itself.
Sacrifice.  - When there is a choice in the matter,  a great sacrifice will be
preferred to a small one: because in the case of the former we can indemnify  ourselves  through the self-admiration we feel,  which we cannot do in the case of the latter.
Love as artifice. - He who really wants to get to know something new (be it a
person,  an event,  a book) does well to entertain it with all possible love
and to avert his eyes quickly from everything in it he finds inimical, repellent,  false,  indeed  to banish it from mind: so that,  for example,  he allows the author of a book the longest  start and then,  like one watching a race,
desires with  beating heart that he may reach his goal.  For with this procedure  one  penetrates  to  the  heart  of the  new  thing,  to  the  point  that actually  moves  it: and precisely this is what is meant by getting to know
it. If one has got this far, reason can afterwards make its reservations; that
over-estimation,  that  temporary  suspension  of  the  critical  pendulum,
was only an artifice for luring forth the soul of a thing.
Thinking too well and too ill of the world. - Whether one thinks too well or too
ill  of  things  one  always  enjoys  the  advantage  of  reaping  a  greater
pleasure:  for  if  our  preconceived  opinion  is  too  favourable  we  usually
introduce  more  sweetness  into  things  (experiences)  than  they  actually
contain.  A  preconceived  opinion  that  is  too  unfavourable  causes  a
pleasant disappointment: what was already pleasant in the thing receives
an addition  through  the  pleasantness of the  surprise.  - A  gloomy  temperament will in both cases experience the opposite.
Deep men. - Those whose strength lies in the depth impressions make on
them - they are usually  called deep men - are when they encounter the
unexpected relatively calm and resolved:  for at the first moment the impression  was  still  shallow,  only then  did  it become deep.  Long foreseen and expected things and people,  on the other hand,  excite such natures
M A N  A L O N E   WITH  H I M S E LF
the most, and when such things finally do arrive their presence of mind
almost deserts them.
Traffic with one's higher self.  - Everyone has his good  days when  he  discovers  his  higher  self;  and  true  humanity  demands  that  everyone  be evaluated  only  in  the  light  of  this  condition  and  not  in  that  of  his
working-day  unfreedom  and  servitude.  A painter,  for example,  should
be appraised and revered in the light of the highest vision he is capable of
seeing and reproducing. But men themselves traffic in very various ways
with  this  higher  self of theirs and  are often actors of themselves,  inasmuch as they afterwards continually imitate that which they are in those moments.  Many  live  in  awe  of  and  abasement  before  their  ideal  and
would like to deny it: they are afraid of their higher self because when it
speaks it speaks imperiously. It pos:;esses, moreover, a spectral freedom
to come or to stay away as it wishes; on this account it is often called a gift
of the gods, whereas in reality it is everything else that is a gift of the gods
(of chance): this however is man himself.
Solitary men. - Some  men are  so accustomed  to  being alone with  themselves that they do not compare themselves with others at all but spin out their life  of  monologue  in  a  calm  and  cheerful  mood,  conversing  and
indeed  laughing  with  themselves  alone.  If  they  are  nonetheless  constrained to compare themselves with others they are inclined to a brooding underestimation of themselves:  so that they have to be compelled to acquire again a good and just opinion of themselves from others: and even
from this acquired opinion they will tend continually to detract and trade
away  something.  - We  must  therefore  allow certain  men  their solitude
and not be so stupid, as we so often are, as to pity them for it.
Without melody. - There are  people  who repose so steadily within themselves and whose capacities are balanced with one  another so  harmoniously  that  any  activity  directed  towards  a  goal  is  repugnant  to  them.
They are like music that consists of nothing but long drawn out harmonious chords, without even the beginning of a moving, articulated melody making  an  appearance.  Any  movement  from  without  serves  only  to
settle  the barque  into a  new equilibrium  on  the lake  of harmonious euphony.  Modern men usually grow extremely impatient when confronted by such natures, which become nothing without our being able to say that
they are nothing.  But in certain moods the sight of them prompts the unusual question: why melody at all? Why does the quiet reflection of life in a deep lake not suffice us? - The Middle Ages were richer in such natures
than our age is.  How seldom do we now encounter one able to live thus
happily and peaceably with himself even in the turmoil of life,  saying to
himself with Goethe: 'the best is the profound stillness towards the world
in which I live and grow, and win for myself what they cannot take from
me with fire and sword'.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
Living and experiencing. - When we observe how some people know how
to manage their experiences - their insignificant, everyday experiences -
so that they become an arable soil that bears fruit three times a year, while
others - and how many there are! - are driven through surging waves of
destiny,  the most multifarious currents of the times and the nations, and
yet  always  remain  on top,  bobbing like  a  cork:  then  we  are  in  the  end
tempted to  divide mankind into a minority (a minimality)  of those who
know how to make much of little, and a majority of those who know how
to  make  little of much;  indeed,  one  does  encounter those  inverted  sorcerers who, instead of creating the world out of nothing, create nothingness out of the world.
Seriousness  in  play.  - In  Genoa  at  the  time  of  evening  twilight  I  heard
coming  from a  tower a  long  peal  of bells: it  seemed it would never stop,
resounding as though it could never have enough of itself over the noise
of the streets out into the evening sky and the sea breeze,  so chilling and
at the same time so childlike,  so melancholy. Then I recalled the words of
Plato  and  suddenly  they  spoke  to  my  heart:  Nothing  human is  worthy  of
being taken very seriously; nonetheless* - -
Of conviction and justice. - That a man must,  in subsequent cold sobriety,
continue  to adhere to what  he has said,  promised,  resolved in passion this demand is among the heaviest of the burdens that oppress mankind.
To be  obliged  to  recognize the  consequences  of  anger,  of  a blazing revengefulness,  of an  enthusiastic  devotion,  for  all  future  time - that  can engender an animosity towards these sensations made the more bitter by
their  idolization  everywhere  and  especially  by  the  artists.  These  latter
greatly  encourage  the  high  value  accorded  the  passions  and  have  always
done so; they also,  to be sure, glorify the fearful amends one must make
for these  same  passions,  the death,  maiming and  voluntary banishment
following on outbursts of revenge, the resignation of the broken heart. In
any  event,  they  keep  awake  our  curiosity  regarding  the  passions,  as
though to  say:  'experience without passion  is nothing at all'.  - Because
we  have  sworn  to be  faithful,  perhaps  even  to  a  purely  fictitious  being
such  as  a  god,  because  we  have  surrenderd  our  heart  to  a  prince,  to  a
party, to a  woman,  to a priestly order,  to an artist, to a thinker, in a state
of deluded  infatuation that made that being seem worthy of every kind of
sacrifice and reverence - are we now ineluctably committed? Were we not
indeed at that time deceiving ourselves? Was it not a hypothetical promise,  made under the admittedly silent condition that the beings  to  which we consecrated ourselves were in reality what they appeared to us to be?
Are  we  obliged  to  be  faithful  to  our  errors,  even  when  we  realize  that
•  Republic,  X  6o4c
M A N   A L O N E   W I T H   H I MS E L F
through  this  faithfulness  we are  injuring  our  higher  self?  - No,  there
exists no law,  no obligation,  of this kind; we have to become  traitors,  be
unfaithful, again and again abandon our ideals. We cannot advance from
one period of our life into the next without passing through these pains of
betrayal  and  then  continuing  to  suffer  them.  If we were  to  avoid  these
pains,  would  it not be necessary for us to  guard ourselves against these
ebullitions  of  our  emotions?  Would  the  world  not  then  become  too
dreary,  too  spectral  for  us?  Let  us ask ourselves,  rather,  whether these
pains are necessarily attendant on a change in our convictions, or whether
they  do  not  proceed from an erroneous evaluation  and  point  of  view.  -
Why do we admire him who is faithful to his convictions and despise him
who changes  them? I  am afraid  the  answer must be:  because  everyone
assumes  that such a  change can be  motivated only by  considerations of
vulgar advantage or  personal  fear.  That is to  say,  we believe at bottom
that  no  one  would  change  his  convictions  so  long  as  they  are  advantageous to him, or at least so long as they do not do him any harm. If this is so,  however,  it  is an ill  witness  as to  the  intellectual significance of all
convictions.  Let  us for once  examine  how convictions originate,  and let
us see whether they are not greatly overestimated: what will emerge too
is that a change in convictions has also invariably been assessed by a false
criterion and that we have hitherto been accustomed to  suffer too much
when such a change has occurred.
6)0
Conviction is the belief that on some particular point of knowledge one is
in possession  of the unqualified  truth.  This belief thus presupposes that
unqualified  truths  exist;  likewise  that  perfect  methods  of  attaining  to
them have been discovered; finally, that everyone who possesses convictions avails himself of these perfect methods. All three assertions demonstrate  at  once  that  the  man  of  convictions  is  not  the  man  of  scientific thought;  he stands before us in the age of theoretical innocence and is a
child, however grown up he rriay be in other respects.  But whole millennia have lived  in  these childish  presuppositions and it is from them that mankind's  mightiest  sources  of  energy  have  flowed.  Those  countless
numbers who  have  sacrificed  themselves  for their convictions  thought
they  were  doing  so  for  unqualified  truth.  In  this  they  were  all  wrong:
probably a man has never yet sacrificed himself for truth; at least the dogmatic expression of his belief will have been unscientific or half-scientific.
In reality one wanted to be in the right because one thought one had to be.
To  allow  oneself  to  be  deprived  of  one's  belief  perhaps  meant  calling
one's eternal salvation into question.  In a matter of such extreme importance as this the  'will'  was only too  audibly the prompter of the intellect.
The presupposition of every believer of every kind was that he could not
be refuted; if the counter-arguments proved very strong it was always left
to him to defame reason itself and perhaps even to set up the 'credo quia
absurdum est'* as the banner of the extremest fanaticism. It is not conflict
•  'credo quia absurdum est': I believe it because it is absurd
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
of opinions that has made history so violent but conflict of belief in opinions,  that  is  to  say  conflict  of  convictions.  But  if  all  those  who  have thought so highly of their convictions, brought to them sacrifices of every
kind,  and have  not  spared  honour,  body or life in their service,  had devoted  only  half  their  energy  to  investigating  with  what  right  they adhered  to  this  or  that conviction,  by  what  path  they  had arrived  at it,
how  peaceable  a  picture  the  history  of  mankind  would  present!  How
much  more knowledge there  would  be! We  should have been  spared all
the cruel  scenes attending the persecution of heretics  of every kind,  and
for  two  reasons:  firstly  because  the  inquisitors  would  have  conducted
their inquisition above all within themselves and emerged out of the presumptuousness of being the defenders of unqualified truth; then because the  heretics  themselves  would,  after  they  had  investigated  them,  have
ceased to accord any further credence to such ill-founded propositions as
the propositions of all religious sectarians and 'right believers' are.
6}1
From the ages in which men were accustomed to believe in possession of
unqualified truth there has come a profound displeasure with all sceptical
and  relativistic positions in  regard  to  any  question  of knowledge  whatever;  one  usually  prefers  to  surrender  unconditionally  to  a  conviction harboured by people in authority (fathers,  friends, teachers, princes) and
feels  a kind of pang of conscience if one fails  to do  so.  This tendency  is
quite comprehensible,  and  its  consequences give  us no  right  to any violent reproaches against the way human reason has evolved. But gradually the  scientific  spirit in men has to bring to  maturity that virtue of cautious
reserve,  that wise moderation which is more familiar in the domain of the
practical  life  than  in  the  domain  of  the  theoretical  life  and  which,  for
example, Goethe has depicted in Antonio as an object of animosity for all
'fassos, *  that  is  to  say  for  unscientific  and  at  the  same  time  inactive
natures. The man of conviction has in himself the right to fail to comprehend  the man of cautious thinking, the theoretical Antonio; the scientific man,  on the other hand,  has no right to blame him for that:  he makes allowances for him,  and  knows  moreover  that  in  the  end  the  latter  will come to cleave to him,  as Tasso finally does to Antonio.
6}2
He who has not passed through different convictions, but remains in the
belief in whose net he was first captured, is on account of this unchangeability  under  all  circumstances  a  representative  of  retarded  cultures;  in accordance with this lack of cultivation (which always presupposes cultivatability)  he is  a  man hard,  uncomprehending,  unteachable,  ungenerous,  everlastingly suspicious and unheeding,  who neglects no means of constantly asserting his  own  point of view  because  he is quite  incapable
of  grasping  that  there  are  bound  to  be  other  points  of  view;  on  this
account  he  is  perhaps  a  source  of  strength,  and  in  cultures grown too
slack and  flabby even salutary,  but only because he arouses vigorous op-
• Antonio . . .  Tassos: characters in Goethe's play Torquato Tasso
M A N   A L O N E   WITH  H IM S E L F
position: for in being compelled to struggle against him the more fragile
structure of the new culture itself grows strong.
We are essentially the same men as those of the age of the Reformation:
and how could  it be otherwise? But that we  no longer permit ourselves
certain means  of assisting our opinion  to victory distinguishes  us  from
that  age  and  demonstrates  that  we  belong  to  a  higher culture.  He  who
still, in the manner of the Reformation man, combats and crushes other
opinions with defamations and outbursts of rage betrays clearly  that he
would have burned his opponents if he had lived in another age, and that
he would have had recourse to all the methods of the Inquisition if he had
been an opponent of the Reformation.  This Inquisition was at that time
reasonable, for it signified nothing other than the state of siege that had
to be decreed for the whole domain of the Church and which, like every
state of siege, justified the extremest measures, always under the presupposition (which we now no longer share with the men of those days) that in the Church one possessed the truth and was obliged to preserve it at the
cost of any sacrifice for the  salvation of mankind.  Nowadays,  however,
we no longer so easily concede to anyone that he is in possession  of the
truth:  the  rigorous  procedures  of inquiry  have  propagated  distrust  and
caution,  so  that anyone  who  advocates  opinions  with violent word  and
deed is felt to be an enemy of our present-day culture,  or at least as one
retarded.  And  the  pathos  of possessing truth  does  now  in fact count  for
very  little  in  comparison  with  that  other,  admittedly  gentler  and  less
noisy pathos of seeking truth that never wearies of learning and examining anew.
The  methodical  search for truth is,  moreover,  itself a  product of  those
ages in which convictions were at war with one another. If the individual
had not been concerned with his 'truth', that is to say with his being in the
right, there would have been no methods of inquiry at all; but with the
claims of different individuals  to unqualified truth  everlastingly  in  conflict with one another, men went on step by step to discover incontestable principles by which these claims could be tested and the contest decided.
At first they appealed  to  authorities,  later  they  criticized  the  ways  and
means through which the other's supposed truths had been discovered;
in between there was a period when they drew the consequences of their
opponent's proposition and perhaps found it harmful and productive of
unhappiness:  from  which  everyone  was  supposed  to  see  that  the  opponent's conviction contained an error. The personal strife of thinkers at last rendered their procedures so acute that truths really could be discovered
and the aberrations of earlier procedures exposed for all to see.
On the whole,  the procedures of science are at least as important a product of inquiry as any other outcome: for the scientific spirit rests upon an 201
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
insight into the procedures,  and if these were lost all the other products
of  science  together  would  not  suffice  to  prevent a  restoration  of  superstition and folly. There are people of intelligence who can learn as many of the  facts  of  science  as  they  like,  but  from  their  conversation,  and
especially  from  the  hypotheses  they put  forward,  you  can tell  that they
lack the spirit of science: they have not that instinctive mistrust of devious
thinking which, as a consequence of long practice, has put its roots down
in  the  soul  of  every  scientific  man.  For  them  it  is  enough  to  have  discovered  any  hypothesis  at  all  concerning  any  matter,  then  they  are  at once on fire for it and believe the whole thing is accomplished. To possess
an opinion is to them the same thing as to become a fanatical adherent of
it and henceforth to lay it to their heart as a conviction.  When something
is in need of explanation they grow impassioned for the first idea to enter
their head that looks in any way like an explanation of it: a procedure productive of the evilest consequences, especially in the domain of politics. -
It is  for  this reason that everyone now  should  have acquired a thorough
knowledge of at least one science:  then he would know what is meant by
method  and procedure and  how vital it is to exercise the greatest circumspection. Women are especially in need of this advice: for they are at present  the  helpless  victims  of  every  hypothesis  that  appears,  especially when  it  produces  the  impression  of being  intelligent,  thrilling,  animating,  invigorating. On closer examination, indeed, one sees that by far the greater part  of all  educated  people even  now  still desire  from a  thinker
convictions and  nothing but convictions,  and  that only a  small  minority
want certainty. The former want to be  violently carried away,  so as themselves  to  experience  an  increase  in  strength;  the  latter few  possess  that objective  interest  that  ignores  personal advantage,  even  the  increase  in
strength  referred  to.  The  former,  vastly  preponderant  class  is  what  the
thinker has in view when he takes himself for a genius, and presents himself  as  a  higher  being  possessing  authority.  Insofar  as  genius  of  every kind  maintains  the  fire  of  convictions  and  awakens  distrust  of  the
modesty and circumspection of science, it is an enemy of truth,  no matter
how  much it may believe itself to be  truth's  suitor.
6)6
There is, to be sure, a quite different species of genius, that of justice; and
I cannot in any way persuade myself to regard it as lower than any kind of
philosophical,  political  or  artistic  genius.  It  is  the  way  of  this  kind  of
genius  to  avoid  with  hearty  indignation  everything  that  confuses  and
deceives us in our judgement of things; it is consequently an opponent of
convictions, for it wants to  give to each his own, whether the thing be dead
or living,  real or imaginary - and  to that end it must have a clear knowledge  of it;  it therefore  sets  every  thing  in  the  best  light  and  observes  it carefully  from  all  sides.  In  the  end it will give  to  its  opponent,  blind  or
shortsighted 'conviction'  (as men  call it: - women call  it  'faith'), what is
due to conviction - for the sake of truth.
M A N   A L O N E   W I TH  H I M S E L F
6J7
Opinions grow out of passions; inertia of the spirit lets them stiffen into con-
victions. - He,  however,  whose spirit is free and restlessly alive can prevent  this  stiffening through  continual  change,  and even if he should be altogether  a  thinking  snowball,  he  will  have  in  his  head,  not opinions,
but only  certainties  and  precisely calculated  probabilities.  - But  let  us,
who are compound creatures, now heated up by fire, now cooled down
by the spirit, kneel down before justice as the only goddess we recognize
over us.  The fire in us usually makes us unjust and,  from the viewpoint of
that  goddess,  impure;  in  this  condition  we  may  never  grasp  her  hand,
never will the smile of her pleasure light upon us.  We revere  her as the
veiled  Isis of our lives; abashed, we offer up to her our pain as penance
and  sacrifice  whenever  the  fire  seeks  to burn  and  consume  us.  It is  the
spirit that rescues us, so that we are not wholly reduced to ashes; it tears
us  away  from  the  sacrificial  altar  of  justice  or  encloses  us  in  a  coat  of
asbestos. Redeemed from the fire,  driven  now by the spirit, we advance
from opinion to  opinion,  through one party after another,  as noble traitors  to all  things  that  can  in  any  way be betrayed - and  yet  we feel  no sense of guilt.
The  Wanderer. - He who has attained to only some degree of freedom of
mind cannot feel other than a  wanderer on the earth - though not as a
traveller to a  final  destination:  for this  destination  does not exist.  But he
will watch and observe and keep his eyes open to see what is really going
on in the world; for this reason he may not let his heart adhere too firmly
to any individual thing; within him too there must be something wandering that takes pleasure in change and transience.  Such a man will,  to be sure,  experience  bad  nights,  when  he  is  tired  and  finds  the  gate  of  the
town  that  should offer him rest  closed  against  him;  perhaps  in addition
the desert will, as in the Orient, reach right up to the gate, beasts of prey
howl now  farther off,  now closer to,  a strong wind arise,  robbers depart
with his beasts of burden.  Then dreadful night may sink down upon the
desert  like  a  second  desert,  and  his  heart  grow  weary  of  wandering.
When the morning sun then rises,  burning like a god of wrath,  and the
gate  of  the  town  opens  to  him,  perhaps  he  will  behold  in  the  faces of
those who dwell there even more desert, dirt, deception, insecurity than
lie  outside  the  gate - and  the  day  will be  almost worse  than  the  night.
Thus  it  may  be  that  the  wanderer  shall  fare;  but  then,  as  recompense,
there will  come  the joyful  mornings of other days and climes,  when he
shall see, even before the light has broken,  the Muses come dancing by
him  in  the  mist of the  mountains,  when afterwards,  if he relaxes quietly
beneath  the  trees  in  the  equanimity  of  his  soul  at  morning,  good  and
bright  things  will  be  thrown  down  to  him  from  their  tops  and  leafy
hiding-places,  the gifts of all those free spirits who are at home in mountain, wood and solitude and who, like him, are, in their now joyful, now thoughtful way,  wanderers and philosophers.  Born out of the mysteries
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
of dawn,  they ponder on how, between the tenth and the twelfth stroke
of the clock,  the day could present a face so pure, so light-filled, so cheerful and  transfigured: - they seek the philosophy of the morning.
AMONG FRIENDS
A N   E P I L OGUE
Fine to lie in  quiet together,
Finer still  to  join in  laughing
Underneath a  silken heaven
Lying back amid the grasses
Join with  friends in  cheerful laughing,
Showing our white teeth  together.
Am  I  right? let's lie in quiet;
Am I wrong? let's join in laughing
And in being aggravating,
Aggravating,  loudly laughing,
Till we reach the grave together.
Shall we  do  this,  friends,  again?
Amen!  and auf Wiedersehn!
No excuses!  No forgiving!
You who laugh and joy in living
Grant this book,  with all its follies,
Ear and heart and open door!
Friends,  believe me,  all my folly's
Been  a blessing heretofore!
What I seek,  what I discover
Has a book contained it ever?
Hail in me the guild of fools!
Learn what this  fools-book's offence is:
Reason coming to its senses!
Shall we, friends, do this again?
Amen! and auf Wiedersehn!
V O L U M E  TWO
PREFACE
One  should  speak only when one may not stay silent; and then only of
that which one has overcome - everything else is chatter,  'literature',  lack
of breeding.  My writings  speak only of my overcomings:  'I'  am in them,
together with everything that was inimical to me, ego ipsissimus, indeed, if
a  yet prouder expression be permitted,  ego  ipsissimum.* One will  divine
that  I  already  have  a  great  deal  - beneath  me . . .  But  it  has  always
required time, recovery, distancing, before the desire awoke within me to
skin,  exploit,  expose,  'exhibit'  (or whatever  one wants  to call it) for  the
sake of knowledge something I had experienced and survived,  some fact
or fate  of  my life.  To  this  extent,  all  my  writings,  with a  single  though
admittedly substantial exception, are to be dated back - they always speak
of something 'behind me' - :  some, as with the first three Untimely Meditations, even to a period earlier than that in which I experienced and produced  a  book  published  before  them  (the  Birth  of Tragedy  in  the  case mentioned: as a more subtle observer and comparer will be able to tell for
himself).  That  angry  outburst  against  the  inflated  Germanism,  complacency and beggarly language of the aged David Strauss, the content of the first Meditation, t gave vent to feelings engendered long before when I
had sat as a student in the midst of German culture and cultural philistinism (I make claim to be the father of the nowadays so much used and misused expression 'cultural philistine' - ); and what I had to say against the
'historical sickness' I said as one who had slowly and toilsomely learned
to recover from it and was in no way prepared to give up 'history' thereafter because he had once suffered from it.  When,  in the third  Untimely Meditation, I then went on to give expression to my reverence for my first
and only educator, the great Arthur Schopenhauer - I would now express
it much more strongly, also more personally - I was, so far as my own development was concerned, already deep in the midst of moral scepticism and destructive analysis,  that is to say in the critique and likewise the intensifying of pessimism as understood hitherto, and already 'believed in nothing any more', as the people puts it, not even in Schopenhauer: just at that time I
produced an essay I have refrained from publishing, 'On Truth and Falsehood in an Extra-Moral Sense'. Even my festive victory address in honour of Richard Wagner on the  occasion  of his  celebration  of victory at Bayreuth in  1876 - Bayreuth signifies the greatest victory an artist has ever
•  ego ipsissimus: my very own self; ego ipsissimum: my innermost self
t  David Strauss (18oo-74): German theologian an attack on whom forms the substance of
the first of the Untimely Meditations
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
achieved - a  work wearing  the  strongest appearance of being  'up to  the
minute', was in its background an act of homage and gratitude to a piece
of my own past, to the fairest but  also most perilous period  of dead calm
of my whole  voyage  . . .  and  in fact a liberation, a farewell.  (Was Richard
Wagner  himself deceived as to  this?  I do not believe  so.  As  long as one
still loves one does not paint pictures like this; one does not yet 'meditate'
on one's subject, one does not set oneself at a distance in the way a 'meditator' must. 'Even contemplation involves a secret antagonism, the antagonism  involved  in  comparison'  - it  says  on  page  forty-six* of  the  said essay itself,  in a  revealing and melancholy phrase perhaps intended for
but few ears. )  The composure needed to be able to speak of an inner solitude  and  self-denial extending over long  intervening years first came to me with the book Human, All Too Human, to which this second foreword
and intercession too is to be dedicated.  As a book 'for free spirits',  there
reposes upon it something of the almost cheerful and inquisitive coldness
of the psychologist who takes a host of painful things that lie beneath and
behind him and identifies  and  as it were impales them with the point of a
needle: - is it any wonder if, with such sharp-pointed and ticklish work, a
certain  amount of blood  occasionally flows,  if the psychologist engaged
on it has blood on his fingers  and  not always  only - on his fingers? . . .
The  'Assorted  opinions  and  maxims'  were,  like  'The  wanderer and  his
shadow',  first  published singly as  continuations  and  appendices  of  the
above-named  human-all-too-human  'Book  for  free  spirits':  at  the  same
time  as a  continuation  and  redoubling of a  spiritual cure,  namely of the
anti-romantic  self-treatment  that  my  still  healthy  instinct  had  itself  discovered  and  prescribed  for  me  against  a  temporary attack  of the  most dangerous form of romanticism.  May these same writings now, after six
years of convalescence,  prove acceptable united as the second volume of
Human, All Too Human: perhaps taken  together they will teach  their precepts more powerfully and  clearly - they are precepts of health that may be recommended to the more spiritual natures of the generation just coming
up  as  a disciplina voluntatis.  There  speaks  out of them a pessimist whose
insights have often  made  him jump out of his skin but who has always
known how to get back into it again,  a pessimist,  that is to say, well disposed towards pessimism - and thus in any event no longer a romantic: what?  should  a  spirit  who  understands  the  serpent's  prudent  art  of
changing his skin  not be permitted  to  read  a  lecture  to  our pessimists of
today, who are one and all still in danger of romanticism? And at the very
least to demonstrate to them how it is - done? . . .
- At that  time it was  indeed  high  time  to say farewell: and  I immediately
received  a  confirmation of the fact.  Richard Wagner,  seemingly the  allconquering,  actually  a  decaying,  despairing  romantic,  suddenly  sank
• p.223 of the Cambridge University Press edition of Untimely Meditations.
PREFACE
down  helpless  and  shattered  before  the  Christian  cross . . .  *  Was  there
no  German  with  eyes  in  his  head,  empathy  in  his  conscience,  for  this
dreadful spectacle? Was I the only one who - suffered from it? Enough,
this unexpected event illumined for me like a flash of lightning the place I
had left - and  likewise  gave me those  subsequent horrors  that he  feels
who he has passed through a terrible peril unawares. As I went on alone,
I trembled; not long afterwards I was sick, more than sick, I was weary of
the unending disappointment with everything we modern men have left
to inspire us,  of the energy,  labour,  hope,  youth,  love everywhere dissipated; weary with disgust at the femininity and ill-bred rapturousness of this romanticism, weary of the whole idealist pack of lies and softening of
conscience that had here once again carried off the victory over one of the
bravest; weary, last but not least, with the bitterness of a suspicion - that,
after  this  disappointment,  I  was  condemned  to  mistrust  more  profoundly,  despise more profoundly,  to  be  more  profoundly  alone than ever before.  My task - where had it gone? What? was it now not as if my
task had withdrawn from me, as though I would for a long time to come
cease  to  have any right to  it? How was I  going to be  able to endure this
greatest of privations? - I began by forbidding myself, totally and on principle,  all  romantic  music,  that  ambiguous,  inflated,  oppressive art  that deprives the spirit of its severity and cheerfulness and lets rampant every
kind  of vague  longing and greedy,  spongy  desire.  'Cave musicam't is to
this day my advice to all who are man enough to  insist on cleanliness in
things of the spirit; such music unnerves,  softens, feminizes, its 'eternal
womanly'  draws  us - downwards!  . . .  At that time I  was first and  foremost suspicious of and circumspect towards romantic music; and if I continued to harbour any hope at all for music it lay in the expectation that a musician  mignt  come  who  was  sufficiently  bold,  subtle,  malicious,
southerly,  superhealthy  to  confront  that  music  and  in  an  immortal
fashion take revenge on it. -
Henceforth  alone  and  sorely  mistrustful  of  myself,  I  thus,  and  not
without  a  sullen  wrathfulness,  took  sides  against myself and for everything painful and difficult precisely for me: - thus I again found my way to that  courageous  pessimism  that  is  the  antithesis  of  all  romantic  mendacity, and also, as it seems to me today, the way to 'myself',  to my task.
That concealed and imperious something for which we for long have no
name until it finally proves to be our task - this tyrant in us takes a terrible
retribution for every attempt we make to avoid or elude it, for every premature  decision,  for  every  association  on  equal  terms  with  those  with whom  we  do not  belong,  for  every  activity,  however  respectable,  if  it
distracts us from our chief undertaking,  even indeed for every virtue that
would  like  to  shield  us  from  the  severity  of  our  own  most  personal
•  Richard  Wagner  . . .  Christian cross: alludes  to  Wagner's  last work,  Parsifal  (produced  at
Bayreuth in 1882).
t  'Cave musicam': Beware music
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
responsibility. Illness is the answer every time we begin to doubt our right
to  our  task  - every  time  we  begin  to  make  things  easier  for  ourselves.
Strange and  at the  same time  terrible!  It is  our alleviations for which we
have to atone the most! And if we afterwards want to return to health, we
have no choice:  we have to  burden ourselves more heavily than we have
ever been burdened before . . .
- It was only then that I learned that solitary's speech that only the most
silent and  the  most  suffering  understand:  I  spoke  without  witnesses,  or
rather in indifference to witnesses, so as not to suffer from staying silent,
I  spoke  only  of  things  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  me  but  did  so  as
though they had something to do with me. It was then I learned the art of
appearing cheerful,  objective,  inquisitive, above all healthy and malicious
- and  this,  it  seems  to  me,  constitutes  'good. taste'  on  the  part of an invalid.  A  subtler  eye  and  empathy  will  nonetheless  not  fail  to  see  what perhaps constitutes the charm  of this  writing - that here a sufferer and
self-denier  speaks as though he were not a sufferer and self-denier.  Here
there is a determination to preserve  an equilibrium  and  composure in the
face of life and even a sense of gratitude towards  it,  here there rules a vigorous, proud, constantly watchful and sensitive will that has set itself the task  of  defending  life  against  pain  and  of  striking  down  all  those
inferences  that  pain,  disappointment,  ill-humour,  solitude,  and  other
swampgrounds usually cause  to  flourish  like poisonous fungi.  This perhaps  offers  to  precisely  our  pessimists  a  signpost  to  their  own  selftesting?  - for  it was  then  that  I  acquired  for  myself  the  proposition:  'a sufferer has  no right to pessimism because  he  suffers!', it was then that I
conducted  with  myself  a  patient  and  tedious  campaign  against  the  unscientific  basic  tendency  of  that  romantic  pessimism  to  interpret  and inflate  individual  personal  experiences  into  universal  judgements  and,
indeed, into condemnations of the world  . . .  in  short,  it was then that I
turned my perspective around. Optimism, for the purpose of restoration,
so that at some future time I could again have the right to be a pessimist do you understand that? Just as a  physician places his patient in a wholly strange  environment  so  that  he  may  be  removed  from  his  entire
'hitherto',  from  his  cares,  friends,  letters,  duties,  stupidities  and  torments  of  memory  and  learn  to  reach  out  his  hands  and  senses  to  new nourishment, a  new sun, a new future,  so I,  as  physician and  patient in
one,  compelled  myself  to  an  opposite  and  unexplored  clime of the soul,
and  especially  to  a  curative  journey  into  strange  parts,  into strangeness
itself,  to  an  inquisitiveness  regarding  every  kind  of  strange  thing . . .  A
protracted  wandering  around,  seeking,  changing  followed  from this,  a
repugnance  towards all staying still,  towards every blunt affirmation and
denial;  likewise a  dietetic and discipline  designed  to  make it as easy as
possible for the spirit to run long distances, to fly to great heights, above
all  again  and  again  to fly away. A minimum of life, in fact,  an unchaining
from all coarser desires,  an independence in the midst of all kinds of un-
PREFACE
favourable  outward  circumstances  together  with  pride  in  being able  to
live  surrounded by these unfavourable circumstances; a certain amount
of cynicism,  perhaps,  a  certain  amount  of  'barrel',* but just as surely a
great deal of capricious  happiness,  capricious  cheerfulness,  a great deal
of stillness,  light, subtler folly, concealed enthusiasm - all this finally resulted in a great spiritual strengthening,  an increasing joy and abundance of health. Life itself rewards us for our tough will to live, for the long war
such  as  I  then  waged  with  myself  against  the  pessimism  of  weariness
with life, even for every attentive glance our gratitude accords to even the
smallest,  tenderest,  most fleeting gift life gives us.  Finally  our reward is
the greatest of life's gifts, perhaps the greatest thing it is able to give of any
kind - we are given our task back. - -
- Shall my experience - the history of an illness and recovery,  for a recovery  was  what  eventuated  - have  been  my  personal  experience  alone?
And only my 'human,  all-too-human'? Today I would like to believe the
reverse; again and again I feel sure that my travel books were not written
solely for myself, as sometimes seems to be the case - .  May I now, after
six years of growing confidence,  venture  to  send  them off again? May I
venture to commend them especially to the hearts and ears of those burdened with any kind of  'past'  and have sufficient spirit left still to suffer from the spirit of their past too? Above all, however, to you, who have the
hardest fate, you  rare,  most imperilled,  most spiritual,  most courageous
men who have to be the conscience of the modern soul and as such have to
possess  its  knowledge,  and  in  whom  all  that  exists  today  of  sickness,
poison and danger comes together - whose lot  it  is to  have to  be  sicker
than any other kind of individual  because you are not 'only individuals'
. . .  whose comfort it is to  know  the way to a  new health,  and alas!  to go
along it, a health of tomorrow and the day after, you predestined and victorious  men,  you  overcomers of your age,  you  healthiest and  strongest men, you good Europeans! - -
- Finally, to reduce my opposition to romantic pessimism, t that is to say the
pessimism  of  the  renunciators,  the  failed  and  defeated,  to  a  formula:
there  is  a  will  to  the  tragic  and  to  pessimism  that  is  as much  a  sign  of
severity and of strength of intellect (taste, feeling, conscience). With this
will in  one's heart one  has  no fear of the  fearful  and  questionable that
characterizes all existence; one even seeks it out. Behind such a will there
stands courage,  pride,  the  longing for a great enemy. - This has been my
pessimistic  perspective  from  the  beginning  - a  novel  perspective,  is  it
not? a perspective that even today is still novel and strange? To this very
•  'barrel': reference  to  Diogenes  the  Cynic  (c. 400 to  c.  325  BC),  reputed to have lived in a
barrel.
t  Nietzsche's term 'romantic pessimism' circumscribes Schopenhauer's philosophy of the
will as well as Wagner's music. In The Gay Science, section 370, it is set against Dionysian pessimism.
21 3
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
moment I continue to adhere to it and, if you will believe me, just as much
for myself as,  occasionally at least, against myself . . .  Do you want me to
prove  this  to  you?  But  what  else  does  this  long preface - prove?
Sils-Maria, Oberengadin
September 1886
PART ONE
ASSORTED OPINIONS
AND MAXIMS
To the disappointed of philosophy - If you have hitherto believed that life was
one of the highest value and now see yourselves disappointed, do you at
once have to reduce it to  the lowest possible price?
Spoiled. - It is possible to be spoiled even in regard to clarity of concepts:
how  repulsive  one  then  finds  it  to  traffic  with  the  half-obscure,  hazy,
aspiring, portentous! How ludicrous and yet not at all cheering an effect
is  produced  by  their  everlasting  fluttering  and  snatching  while  being
unable to  fly or to capture!
The wooer of reality. - He who finally sees how long and how greatly he has
been made a fool of embraces in defiance even the ugliest reality: so that,
viewing the way of the world as a whole, the latter has at all times had the
best  of  all  wooers  - for  it  is  the  best  who  have  always  been  most
thoroughly deceived.
Progress of free-spiritedness. - The difference between free-spiritedness as it
used to be and as it is now cannot be made clearer than by recalling that
proposition  for  the  recognition  and  expression  of  which  the  previous
century had to summon up all its intrepidity but which, judged from the
present posture of knowledge,  nonetheless sinks to being a  piece of involuntary  naivety - I  mean Voltaire's proposition:  'croyez  moi,  mon ami,
/' erreur aussi a son merite'. �
An original sin of philosophers.  - Philosophers  have at all  times  appropriated  the  propositions  of  the  examiners  of  men  (moralists)  and  ruined them,  inasmuch  as  they  have  taken  them  for  unqualified  propositions
and sought to  demonstrate the absolute validity of what these moralists
intended merely as approximate signposts or even as no more than truths
possessing tenancy only for a decade - and through doing so thought to
elevate  themselves  above  the  latter.  Thus  we  find  pieces  of  popular
wisdom  originating with  the  moralists  employed  to  buttress  Schopenhauer's celebrated doctrines of the primacy of the will over the intellect, of the unalterability of the character and of the negativity of pleasure - all
of which are,  in the sense  in  which he understands them,  errors. Even
•  'croyez  . . .  merite': believe me,  my friend,  error also has its merits.
H U M A N ,   A l l  TOO  H U M A N
the  word  'will',  which  Schopenhauer  remoulded  as a  common  designation  for  many  different  human  states  and  inserted  into  a  gap  in  the language - greatly  to  his  own  advantage  insofar as  he  was  a  moralist,
since he was now at liberty to speak of the 'will' as Pascal had spoken of it
- even Schopenhauer's  'will'  has,  in  the hands of its originator through
the  philosopher's  rage for generalization  turned  out  to  be  a  disaster  for
science: for this will has been turned into a metaphor when  it is asserted
that all things in nature possess will; finally, so that it can be pressed into
the  service  of  all  kinds  of  mystical  mischief  it  has  been  misemployed
towards a  false reification - and  all the  modish  philosophers  speak of it
and seem to know for certain that all things possess one will and, indeed,
are this one will (which, from the description they give of this all-one-will,
is as good as wanting to  make God out to be  the stupid Devil).
Against fantasists. - The fantasist denies reality to himself,  the liar does so
only to others.
Hostile to light. - If we make it clear to someone that strictly speaking he is
never able to  speak of truth but only of probability and degrees of probability, we usually discover from the unconcealed joy of one so instructed how much  men prefer the spiritual horizon to be  fluctuating and how in
the depths of their soul they  hate truth  on account of its certainty. - Is the
reason that  they are all  secretly  afraid  that one day the light of truth will
be  directed  too  brightly  upon  them?  They  want  to  signify  something,
consequently no one must know too exactly what they are? Or is it merely
dread of a  light brighter than their twilight,  easily dazzled bat-souls are
unaccustomed to and which they  must therefore hate?
Christian  scepticism .   - Christians  today  like  to  set  up  Pilate,  with  his
question 'What is truth?', as an advocate of Christ,  so as to cast suspicion
on  everything  known  or  knowable  and  to  erect  the  Cross  against  the
dreadful background of the impossibility of knowing.
'Law of nature' a superstition. - When you  speak so rapturously of a con-
formity  to  law in  nature  you  must  either  assume  that all natural  things
freely  obey  laws  they  themselves  have  imposed  upon  themselves  - in
which case you are admiring the morality of nature - or you are entranced
by  the  idea  of a  creative  mechanic  who  has  made  the  most  ingenious
clock, with  living creatures upon it as decorations. - Necessity in nature
becomes  more  human  and  a  last  refuge  of  mythological  dreaming
through the  expression  'conformity to law'.
For1, •• • o history. - The veil-philosophers and world-obscurers,  that is to
say  all  metaphysicians of finer or coarser grain, are seized with eye-, ear-
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
and  toothache  when  they  begin  to suspect  that  the  proposition  'The
whole  of  philosophy  is  henceforth  forfeit  to  history'  is  quite  true.  On
account of the pain they feel they must be  forgiven  for throwing stones
and  dirt  at  him  who  speaks  thus:  the  proposition  itself,  however,  can
thereby  become  dirty and  unsightly  for  a  time,  and  its effectiveness be
diminished.
The pessimist of the intellect. - The truly free in spirit will also think freely
regarding the spirit itself and will not dissemble over certain dreadful elements  in  its origin and  tendency.  On  that  account others will  perhaps designate him the worst of the opponents of free-spiritedness and inflict
on him the abusive title of 'pessimist of the intellect': which they will do
because they are accustomed to call everyone, not by those strengths and
virtues that distinguish him,  but by that in  him in which he most differs
from them.
Knapsack of the metaphysicians. - Those who boast so mightily of the scientificality  of their  metaphysics  should  receive  no answer;  it is enough to pluck at the bundle which, with a certain degree of embarrassment, they
keep concealed behind their back; if one succeeds in opening it, the products of that scientificality come to light,  attended by their blushes: a dear little  Lord  God,  a  nice  little  immortality,  perhaps  a  certain  quantity  of
spiritualism,  and  in  any event a whole tangled  heap of  'wretched  poor
sinner' and Pharisee arrogance.
1)
Knowledge occasionally harmful. - The utility of the unconditional search for
the true is continually being demonstrated in  so many ways  that we are
obliged  to  accept  unconditionally  the  subtler  and  rarer  harm  the  individual has to suffer as a consequence of it. We cannot prevent the chemist from  occasionally  poisoning  or  burning  himself  in  the  course  of  his
experiments. - What applies to the chemist also applies to our entire culture: from which, by the way, it clearly emerges how much attention the latter has to pay to the provision of ointments to counter burning and to
the constant availability of antidotes to poison.
Philistine's necessity. - The Philistine believes that what he needs most is a
purple drape or turban of metaphysics, and will in no way allow these to
be  taken  from  him:  and  yet  he  would  look  less  ludicrous  without  this
finery.
Fanatics. - However  much  fanatics  may bear  themselves as judges  (and
not as the accused),  all they have to say in favour of their gospel or their
master is in fact said in their own self-defence: for it reminds them,  involuntarily and at almost  every moment,  that they are exceptions that have to legitimise  themselves.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Good things seduce one to life. - All good things are powerful stimulants to
life,  even a good book written against life.
Happiness of the historian . - 'When we hear ingenious metaphysicians and
backworldsmen talk, we others may feel that we are the "poor in spirit",
but  we  also  feel  that  ours  is  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  of  change,  with
spring and autumn, winter and summer, and that theirs is the backworld
- with its gray,  frosty,  unending mist and  shadow.' - Thus a man spoke
to himself while walking in the morning  sun:  one in whom history again
and  again  transforms not only his spirit but also his heart,  and who,  in
contrast  to  the  metaphysicians,  is  happy  to  harbour  in himself,  not 'an
immortal soul', but many mortal souls.
Three  kinds of  thinker.  - There are mineral  springs that gush,  those  that
flow,  and those that trickle; and  correspondingly  three kinds of thinker.
The laity evaluates them according to the volume of water, the true judge
according to the content of the water, that is to say according to precisely
that in them that is not water.
The picture of life. - The  task of painting  the picture of life,  however often
poets and philosophers may pose it, is nonetheless senseless: even under
the hands of the greatest of painter-thinkers all that has ever eventuated
is pictures and miniatures  out of one life,  namely their own - and nothing
else is even possible.  Something in course of becoming cannot be reflected as a firm and  lasting image, as a  'the', in something else in course of becoming.
Truth will have no other gods beside it. - Belief in truth begins with doubt as
to all truths believed in hitherto.
Where silence is demanded. - When one speaks of free-spiritedness as of a
highly  perilous wandering on glaciers and polar seas,  those who do not
wish  to  make  this  journey  are  offended,  as  though  they  had  been
reproached  with  timorousness  and  weak  knees.  A  difficult  thing we do
not feel up to is not supposed even to be  spoken of in our presence.
Historia in nuce. * - The  most serious parody I  have ever heard is the following:  'in  the  beginning  was  the  madness,  and  the  madness  was,  by God!,  and  God  (divine) was  the  madness'.
Incurable. - An idealist is incorrigible:  if he is ejected from his Heaven he
•  Historia in nuce:  History  in  a  nutshell
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
makes an ideal out of Hell. Let him be disillusioned and behold! - he will
embrace  this disillusionment just as fervently  as a little while before  he
embraced his hopes. Insofar as his tendency is among the great incurable
tendencies of human nature he is able to give rise to  tragic destinies and
afterwards become the subject of tragedies: for tragedies have to do with
precisely  what  is  incurable,  ineluctable,  inescapable  in  the  fate  and
character of man.
Applause itself as a continuation of the play. - Radiant eyes and a benevolent
smile  is  the  kind  of  applause  rendered  to  the  whole  great  universal
comedy of existence - but at the same time a comedy within the comedy
aimed at seducing the other spectators to a 'plaudite amici'. •
Courage to be boring. - Whoever lacks the courage to allow himself and his
work to be found boring is certainly not a spirit of the first rank, whether
in  the  arts  or  the  sciences.  - A  scoffer  who  was  also,  exceptionally,  a
thinker,  might take a  glance at  the world and  its  history and  add:  'God
lacked this courage; he wanted to make all things too interesting, and he
did so.'
From  the  thinker's innermost experience. - Nothing is  more difficult for  man
than to apprehend a thing impersonally: I mean to see it as a thing, not as
a person: one might question, indeed, whether it is at all possible for him
to  suspend the  clockwork  of his person-constructing,  person-inventing
drive even for a moment.  He traffics even with ideas, though they be the
most abstract, as if they were individuals with whom one has to struggle,
to whom one was to ally oneself, whom one has to tend, protect and nourish. We have only to spy on ourselves at that moment when we hear or discover a proposition new to  us.  Perhaps it displeases us because of its
defiant and autocratic bearing; we unconsciously ask ourselves whether
we shall not set a counter-proposition as an enemy beside it, whether we
can append  to  it a  'perhaps',  a  'sometimes';  even the  little word  'probably' does us good, because it breaks the personally burdensome tyranny of  the  unconditional.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  this  new  proposition
approaches us in a milder shape, nice and tolerant, humble, and sinking
as it were into the arms of .::ontradiction,  we try another way of testing
our autocracy: what, can we not come to the assistance of this weak creature,  stroke and feed  it,  give  it  strength  and  fullness,  indeed truth and even unconditionality? Can we  possibly be  parental or knightly or pitying towards it? - Then again,  we behold a judgement here and a judgement  there,  separated  from  one  another,  not  regarding  one  another, making  no  impression  one  upon  the  other:  and  we  are  tickled  by  the
thought of whether here a marriage might not be arranged, a conclusion
•  plaudite amici: applaud, friends!
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
drawn, in the presentiment that, if a consequence  should proceed  from
this  conclusion,  the  honour  of  it  will  fall  not  only  to  the  two  married
judgements but  also  to  those  who  arranged  the  marriage.  If,  however,
one can get hold of that idea neither by means of defiance and ill-will nor
by means of good-will (if one holds it for true - ),  then one yields and pays
it homage as a prince and leader, accords it a seat of honour and speaks of
it with  pomp and pride: for in its glitter one glitters  too.  Woe to him who
seeks to darken it; unless it itself should one day become suspicious to us:
- then,  unwearying king-makers in the history of the spirit that we are,
we hurl it from the throne and immediately raise its opponent in its place.
Let one ponder this and then think on a little further: certainly no one will
then  speak  of a  'drive  to  knowledge  in  and for itself'! - Why then  does
man prefer the true to the untrue in this secret struggle with idea-persons,
in  this  usually  hidden  idea-marrying,  idea-state-founding,  ideapedagogy,  idea-tending of the sick and poor?  For the same reason as he practises justice  in  traffic  with  real  persons:  now  out  of  habit,  heredity
and training, originally because the true - as also the fair and just - is more
useful and  more productive of honour than  the  untrue.  For in  the  realm  of
thought,  power and fame are  hard  to  maintain if erected  on the  basis  of
error or lies: the feeling that  such a building could at some time or other
fall down is humiliating to the self-conceit of its architect; he is ashamed of
the  fragility  of  his  material  and,  because  he  takes  himself  more seriously
than  he does  the rest of the world,  wants  to do  nothing  that is not more
enduring than  the  rest  of the world.  It is as a  consequence  of his demand
for truth that he embraces belief in personal immortality, that is to say the
most arrogant and defiant idea that exists,  united as it is with the hidden
thought 'pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim!'* His work has become for him
his ego,  he  transforms  himself into the intransitory,  the all-defiant.  It is
his immeasurable pride which wants to employ only the finest,  hardest
stones for its work,  that is to say truths or what it takes for truths.  At all
times arrogance has  rightly been  designated  the 'vice of the intellectual' yet without the motive power of this vice truth and the respect accorded it would be miserably accommodated on  this  earth.  That we are afraid of
our  own  ideas,  concepts,  words,  but also honour ourselves  in them and
involuntarily ascribe to them the capacity to instruct,  despise, praise and
censure us, that we thus traffic with them as with free intelligent persons,
with  independent powers,  as  equals with equals - it is  in  this  that the
strange phenomenon I have called 'intellectual conscience' has its roots. -
Thus here too something moral of the highest sort has blossomed out of a
black root.
Obscurantists. - The essential element in the black art of obscurantism is
not that it wants to darken individual understanding but that it wants to
blacken  our  picture  of the  world,  and  darken  our idea of existence.  Darkening of the understanding is,  to be sure, often the means that serves it to
•  'pereat  . . .  sim':  let  the  world perish so  long  as I  am  safe.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S  A N D  M A X I M S
thwart the enlightenment of the mind:  sometimes, however, it employs
the  opposite  means  and  seeks  through  the  highest  refinement  of  the
intellect  to  induce  a  satiation  with  its  fruits.  Ingenious  metaphysicians
who prepare the way for scepticism,  and through their excessive acuteness invite mistrust of acuteness, are excellent instruments in the hands of a more refined obscurantism. - Is it possible that even Kant can be used
to this end? that he himself, indeed, according to his own notorious declaration,  desired something of the kind,  at any rate for a time:  to open a path for faith by showing knowledge its limitations? - which, to be sure, he
failed to do, just as little as did his successors on the wolf- and fox-paths
of this most refined and dangerous obscurantism: the most dangerous of
all, indeed, for here the black art appears in a veil of light.
By  what  kind  of  philosophy  art  is  corrupted.  - When  the  mists  of  a
metaphysical-mystical  philosophy  succeed  i�  rendering  all  aesthetic
phenomena opaque, it follows that they are also incapable of being evaluated
one  against  another,  because each  of them has become inexplicable.  If,
however,  they are  never again compared with one another for the  purpose of evaluation, there at last arises a completely uncritical frame of mind, a  blind  toleration,  but  likewise  a  steady  decline  in  the enjoyment of art
(which is distinguished from the crude appeasement of a need only by a
highly  acute  tasting  and  distinguishing).  The  more  this  enjoyment
declines,  however,  the  more  the  desire  for art is transformed back  to  a
vulgar  hunger  which  the  artist  then  seeks  to  satisfy  with  ever  coarser
fare.
In Gethsemane. - The most grievous thing the thinker can say to the artists
is:  'What, could ye not watch with me one hour?'
At the loom. - The few who take pleasure in untying the knot of things and
unravelling its threads are actively opposed by those many (for example
all artists and women) who repeatedly try to tie it again, to entangle it and
thus transform  what  is  comprehended  into the uncomprehended  and,
where  possible,  incomprehensible.  Whatever  else  may  eventuate  from
this - the resulting knots and ravelled threads are always bound to look a
trifle dirty,  because  too many hands have been  working and tugging at
them.
In the desert of science.  - To  the man of science on his unassuming and
laborious  travels,  which  must  often  enough  be  journeys  through  the
desert,  there  appear  those  glittering  mirages  called  'philosophical
systems': with bewitching, deceptive power they show the solution of all
enigmas and the freshest draught of the  true  water of life to be  near at
hand; his heart rejoices,  and it seems to the weary traveller that his lips
already touch the goal of all the perseverance and sorrows of the scientific
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
life, so that he involuntarily presses forward. There are other natures,  to
be sure, which stand still,  as  if bewildered by the  fair illusion:  the  desert
swallows  them  up  and  they  are  dead  to  science.  Other  natures  again,
which  have  often  before  experienced  this  subjective  solace,  may  well
grow  exceedingly  ill-humoured  and  curse  the  salty  taste  which  these
apparitions  leave  behind  in  the  mouth  and  from  which  arises  a  raging
thirst  - without  one's  having  been  brought  so  much  as  a  single  step
nearer to any kind of spring.
Alleged  'real reality'. - When  he  describes  the  various  professions - e.g.
that of the general, the silk-weaver, the seaman - the poet poses as knowing of these things to the very bottom; indeed, when it comes to the conflict  of  human  actions  and  destinies  he  acts  as  though  he  had  been present at the weaving of the whole  nexus of the world;  to this extent he
is a deceiver. And he practises his deception only before those who do not
know - and  that  is why  his  deception  is  successful:  the  latter  commend
him  for his  profound  and  genuine knowledge and in the end induce  in
him the delusion that he really does know these things as well as do the
individuals  he  is  describing,  indeed  as  well  as  the  great  world-spider
itself.  Thus at last  the deceiver becomes honest and believes in his own
veracity.  People  of sensibility,  indeed,  even  tell  him  to  his face  that  he
possesses  a  higher  truth  and  veracity  - for  they  are  for  a  time  tired  of
reality and accept the  poetic dream as a beneficent relaxation and night
for  head  and  heart.  What  this  dream  shows  them  how  seems  to  them
more  valuable,  because,  as  remarked,  they  find  it  more  beneficent:  and
men  have  always  believed  that  that  which  seems  more  valuable  is  the
tru<?r and more real. Poets conscious of possessing this power deliberately
set  out  to  discredit  that  which  is usually  called  reality  and  transform  it
into the uncertain,  apparent,  spurious,  sinful,  suffering, deceptive; they
employ all the doubts that  exist as to the limitations of knowledge, all the
extravagances of scepticism, to spread a wrinkled veil of uncertainty over
things:  in  order  that  after  this  darkening  their  sorcery  and  soul-magic
shall  be unhesitatingly taken for the path to 'true  truth',  to 'real reality'.
The desire to be just and the desire to be a judge. - Schopenhauer, whose great
knowledgeability  about  the  human  and  all-too-human,  whose  native
sense of reality was not a little dimmed by the motley leopard-skin of his
metaphysics (which one must first remove from him if one is to discover
the real moralist genius beneath it) - Schopenhauer makes  that striking
distinction  which  is  very  much  more  justified  than  he  really  dared  to
admit to himself: 'the insight into  the strict necessity of human actions is
the boundary line which divides philosophical heads from the others'. This
mighty insight, which from time to time he publicly avowed, he nonetheless counteracted in his own mind with that prejudice which he still had in common with moral men (not with the moralists) and which, quite innocuously and credulously, he expressed as:  'the ultimate and true eluci-222
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S  A N D   M A X I M S
dation of the inner nature of the whole of things must necessarily hang
closely together with that of the ethical significance of human behaviour'
- which is absolutely not 'necessary' but, on the contrary, has been rejected by precisely that proposition of the strict necessity of human actions, that is to  say,  the  unconditional unfreedom and unaccountability of the
will.  Philosophical  heads  will  thus  distinguish  themselves  from  the
others  through  their  unbelief  in  the  metaphysical  significance  of  morality:  and  that  may  establish  a  gulf between  them  of whose  depth  and unbridgeability  the  so  much  lamented  gulf between  the  'cultured'  and
the 'uncultured', as it now exists, gives hardly any idea. Many more backdoors,  to be  sure,  which  'philosophical heads'  have,  like  Schopenhauer himself, left open must be recognised as useless:  none leads outside,  into
the  air  of free  will:  every  one  which  has  hitherto  been  slipped  through
reveals behind it every time a brazen wall of fate: we are in prison, we can
only dream ourselves free, not make ourselves free.  That this knowledge
cannot  for very  much  longer  be  resisted  is  indicated  by  the  despairing
and incredible  postures and contortions of those who assail it,  who still
continue  to  wrestle with  it.  - This,  approximately,  is  how  they  go  on:
'What,  is no man accountable? And is everything full of guilt and feeling
of guilt? But someone or other has to be the sinner, if it is impossible and
no  longer  permissible  to  accuse  and  to  judge  the  individual,  the  poor
wave  in  the  necessary  wave-play  of becoming - very  well:  then  let  the
wave-play itself, becoming, be the sinner: here is free will, here there can
be accusing,  condemning,  atonement and expiation:  then  let God be  the
sinner  and  man  his  redeemer:  then  let  world  history  be  guilt,  selfcondemnation and suicide; thus will the offender become his own judge, the judge  his own executioner.' - This Christianity stood on  its head - for
what else is it? - is the final lunge in the struggle of the theory of unconditional morality with that of unconditional freedom - a horrible thing if it were anything more than a  logical grimace,  more than an ugly gesture on
the part of the defeated idea - perhaps the death-throes of the despairing
and salvation-thirsty heart to which madness whispers: 'Behold, thou art
the lamb that beareth the sins of God.' - The error lies not only in the feeling 'I am accountable', but equally in that antithesis 'I am not,  but somebody has  to  be.' - This is,  in fact,  not true:  the  philosopher thus has to say, as Christ did, 'judge not!' and the ultimate distinction between philosophical heads and the others would be that the former desire to be just, the others to be a judge.
Sacrifice. - Do you  think that the mark of the moral action is sacrifice?
But reflect whether sacrifice is not present in every action that is done with
deliberation,  in the worst as in the best.
Against the examiners of morality. - To know the strength of a man's moral
nature one has to know the best and the worst he is capable of in thought
and deed.  But to learn that is impossible.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Serpent's  tooth.  - We  do  not  know  whether  or not we  have a  serpent's
tooth until  someone  has  set his heel on us.  A woman or mother would
say:  until  someone  has  set  his  heel  on  our  darling,  our  child.  - Our
character is determined even more by the lack of certain experiences than
by that which we experience.
Deception in love. - We forget a great deal of our own past and deliberately
banish it from our minds: that is to say,  we want the image of ourself that
shines upon us out of the past to deceive us and flatter our self-conceit we are engaged  continually on this self-deception.  - And do you think, you who speak so much of 'self-forgetfulness in love', of 'the merging of
the ego in the other person',  and laud  it so highly,  do you think this is
anything  essentially  different?  We  shatter  the  mirror,  impose  ourself
upon  someone  we  admire,  and  then  enjoy  our  ego's  new  image,  even
though we may call it by that other person's name - and this whole proceding  is  supposed  not  to  be  self-deception,  not  egoism!  A  strange  delusion! - Those who conceal something of themselves from themselves and those  who conceal  themselves from  themselves as a  whole are,  I  think,
alike in this,  that they perpetrate a robbery in the treasure-house of knowledge:  from which we can see against which transgression the injunction
'know thyself' is a warning.
To him who denies his vanity. - He who denies he possesses vanity usually
possesses it in so brutal a form he instinctively  shuts  his eyes to it so as
not to be obliged to despise himself.
Why the stupid are so often  malicious.  - When our head feels too  weak to
answer the objections of our opponent our heart answers by casting suspicion on the motives behind his objections.
The art of the moral exceptions. - An art that exhibits and glorifies the exceptional cases of morality - in which good becomes bad and the unjust just should be listened to only rarely: just as we now and then buy something from  the  gipsies  but  do so in  trepidation  lest they  should  obtain  much
more from us than the purchase is worth.
Enjoyment and non-enjoyment of poisons. - The only decisive argument that
has at all times prevented men from drinking a poison is not that it would
kill them but that it tasted  nasty.
The world  without feeling of sin.  - If only  those  deeds  were  done  which
engendered no bad conscience the human world would still look bad and
villainous enough: but not as sickly and wretched as it does now. - There
ASS ORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
have at all times been sufficient bad men without a conscience: and many
good and fine men lack the pleasurable sensation of the good conscience.
The conscientious. - It is more comfortable to follow one's conscience than
one's reason: for it offers an excuse and alleviation if what we undertake
miscarries - which is why there are always so many conscientious people
and so few reasonable ones.
Opposite ways of avoiding embitterment. - To one kind of temperament it is
useful to be able  to expel its ill-humour in words: in speech it sweetens
itself.  Another temperament,  however,  attains to the height of its bitterness only through articulation: to this kind it is more advisable to have to swallow  something  down:  compulsion  to  constrain  themselves  before
enemies or superiors improves the character of such people and prevents
them from growing too acrid and sour.
Not too seriously. - To  get bed-sores is unpleasant,  but it is not evidence
against  the  validity  of the  cure  that consigned  one  to  bed.  - Men who
lived for long outside themselves and finally turned to the philosophical
inner life know that the heart and the spirit can also get bed-sores. This is
likewise  no  argument  against  the  mode  of  life  they  have  chosen  as  a
whole, but it makes a few little exceptions and apparent relapses necessary.
The human  'thing in itself'. - The  thing most vulnerable and yet  the most
unconquerable is human vanity:  indeed,  its strength increases,  and can
in the end become gigantic, through being wounded.
Farce of many of the industrious. - Through an excess of exertion they gain
for themselves free time, and afterwards have no idea what to do with it
except to count the hours until it has expired.
Having much joy. - He who has much joy in his life must be a good man:
but he is perhaps not the cleverest, even though he has attained precisely
that which the cleverest man strives after with all his cleverness.
In the mirror of nature. - Has a man not been fairly exactly described when
one hears that he likes to wander between fields of tall yellow corn,  that
he prefers the colours of the woods and flowers in glowing and golden
autumn because they intimate greater beauty than ever nature achieved,
that he feels quite at home among great thick-leaved nut-trees as though
among his blood relations,  that in the mountains his greatest joy is to encounter those remote little lakes out of which solitude itself seems to gaze 225
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
up at him,  that  he loves  that  gray  reposefulness  of twilight  mist  that
creeps  up  to  the  windows  on  autumn  and  early  winter  evenings  and
shuts  out  every  soulless  sound  as  though  with  velvet  curtains,  that  he
feels  the  unhewn  rocks  to  be  unwillingly  mute  witnesses  to  times  primeval and has revered them from a child, and finally that the sea, with its rippling snake-skin and beast-of-prey beauty, is and remains alien to him?
- Yes, something of this man has therewith been described, to be sure, but
the  mirror of nature says nothing of the fact that the same  man,  with all
his  idyllic  sensibility  (and  not  even  'in  spite  of it'),  could  be  somewhat
loveless,  niggardly  and  conceited.  Horace,  who understood  such things
as this,  placed the tenderest feeling for country life in the mouth and soul
of a  Roman  usurer, in the celebrated 'beatus ille qui procul negotiis'. •
Power  without  victories.  - The  strongest  knowledge  (that  of  the  total
unfreedom of the human will) is nonetheless the poorest in successes: for
it always  has  the  strongest opponent, human vanity.
Joy and error. - One person has a beneficent effect on his friends involuntarily through his nature,  another does so voluntarily through individual actions.  Although the former counts as the higher, yet only the latter is associated with joy and a good conscience - the joy,  that is,  attending the performance of good works, which rests on belief in the voluntary nature
of our good or wicked  acts,  that is to say on an error.
It  is foolish  to  act  unjustly.  - An  injustice  we  have  perpetrated  is  much
harder to bear than  an injustice perpetrated against  us  (not precisely on
moral grounds, nota bene - ); the actor is always the actual sufferer, if,  that
is to say,  he is accessible to pangs  of conscience or has the insight to see
that  through  his  action  he  has  armed  society  against  him  and  isolated
himself.  That is why we  ought,  purely for the  sake  of our inner happiness,  that  is  to  say  so as  not  to  lose  our ease  and  quite apart from the commandments of religion and morality, to guard ourselves against committing  injustice  even  more  than  against  experiencing  injustice:  for the latter  carries  with it the consolation of the good conscience and hope of
revenge  and  of  the  sympathy  and  applause  of  the  just,  indeed  of the
whole of society,  who live in fear of the evil-doer. - There are not a few
who understand the unclean art of self-duping by means of which every
unjust  act  they  perform  is  reminted  into  an  injustice  done  to  them  by
others  and  the  exceptional  right  of  self-defence  reserved  to  what  they
themselves  have  done:  the  purpose being  greatly  to  ease the  weight of
their own burden.
Envy with or without mouthpiece.  - Commonplace  envy is accustomed  to
cackle as  soon  as  the envied hen  has  laid an egg: it thereby relieves itself
•  'beatus . . .  negotiis': happy the man who, far from business cares . . .  (Horace: Epodes II).
A S S ORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
and grows  gentler.  But  there  exists  a yet  deeper envy: in such  a case  it
becomes  deathly  silent  and,  wishing  that  every  mouth  would  now
become sealed,  grows ever angrier that precisely this is what is not happening.  Silent envy grows in silence.
Anger as spy. - Anger  empties  out the  soul and brings even  its dregs  to
light. That is why, if we know no other way of discovering the truth of the
matter,  we  must know  how to put  our acquaintances, our adherents and
opponents, into a rage, so as to learn all that is really being thought and
undertaken against us.
Defence presents greater moral difficulty than attack.  - The  real  heroic deed
and masterpiece of the good  man lies not in his attacking the cause and
continuing to love the person but in the much more difficult feat of defending  his  own  cause  without  inflicting  and  desiring  to  inflict  with  bitter anguish  the  person attacked.  The  sword  of attack is broad  and  honest,
that of defence usually comes to a needle-point.
Honest about honesty. - He who is publicly  honest about himself ends by
priding himself a little on this honesty: for he knows only too well why he
is honest - for the same reason another prefers appearance and dissimulation.
Hot coals. - Heaping hot coals on another's head is usually misunderstood
and miscarries, because the other likewise knows he is in possession of
the right and for his part has also thought of heaping coals.
Dangerous books. - Somebody remarked: 'I can tell by my own reaction to it
that this book is harmful.' But let him only wait and perhaps one day he
will admit to himself that this same  book  has  done  him a great  service by
bringing  out  the  hidden  sickness  of  his  heart  and  making  it  visible.  -
Altered  opinions do not alter a man's character (or do so very little); but
they do illuminate individual aspects of the  constellation of his personality  which  with  a  different  constellation  of  opinions  had  hitherto remained dark and unrecognizable.
Feigned sympathy. - We feign sympathy when we want to demonstrate our
superiority to  feelings  of hostility: but usually in  vain.  When we  notice
this we experience a sharp rise in those hostile sensations.
6o
Open contradiction often reconciliatory. - When  someone publicly declares
that  he  differs  from  a  celebrated  party  leader  or  teacher  in a  matter  of
dogma  all  the world believes  that  at  that  moment he  must  harbour  a
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
dislike of him. But sometimes it is at precisely that moment that he ceases
to dislike him: he ventures to set himself up beside him and is free of the
torment of unspoken jealousy.
Seeing one's light shine. - In dark states of distress, sickness or debt we are
glad  when  we  perceive  others  still  shining  and  they  perceive  in  us  the
bright  disk  of the moon.  In  this  indirect way we participate in our own
capacity to illumine.
joying with. - The serpent that stings us means to hurt us and rejoices as it
does so; the lowest animal can imagine the pain of others. But to imagine
the joy of others and to rejoice at it is the highest privilege of the highest
animals,  and among them it is accessible only to the choicest exemplars thus  a  rare  humanum:* so that  there  have been  philosophers  who  have denied the existence of joying with.
Pregnancy after birth. - Those who have arrived at their works and deeds
they know  not  how  usually go  about  afterwards  all  the  more  pregnant
with them: as though later to prove that these children are theirs and not
those of chance.
Hard-hearted out of vanity. - Just as justice is so often a cloak for weakness,
so fair thinking but weak men are sometimes led by ambition to dissimulation and deliberately behave unjustly and harshly so as to leave behind them an impression of strength.
Humiliation. - If anyone given a whole sack of advantages finds in it even
one grain of humiliation he cannot help making the worst of a good bargain.
Extreme  of Herostratism.  - There  could  be  Herostratuses  who  burned
down their own temple where their images were venerated.
The diminutive  world.  - The  circumstance  that  everything  weak  and  in
need  of assistance  speaks  to  our  heart  has  produced  in  us  the  habit  of
characterizing everything that speaks to our heart with diminishing and
enfeebling words - so as to make it seem weak and in need of assistance.
Pity's bad qualities.  - Pity has a singular piece of impudence for its companion:  for,  because  it  is  absolutely  determined  to  render assistance,  it experiences no perplexity as to either the means of cure or the nature and
•  humanum: human quality
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
cause of the illness, but gaily sets about quackdoctoring at the health and
reputation of its patient.
Importunity.  - There also exists  an  importunate attitude towards works;
and to associate  oneself imitatively on a  Du  and  Du basis with the most
illustrious  works  of all  time  while  still  no  more  than  a  youth  reveals  a
complete  lack  of shame.  - Others  are  importunate  only  through  ignorance: they do not know whom they are dealing with - as,  for instance, is often the case with  philologists  old and young in regard  to the works of
the Greeks.
The will is ashamed of the intellect. - We draw up rational  plans in all coldness  to  counter  our  emotions:  then,  however,  we  commit  the  crudest blunders with respect to these plans, because at the moment we are supposed to act we  are often overcome with shame at the coldness and circumspection  with  which we conceived them.  And  what  we  then  do is precisely the irrational - out of that species of defiant magnanimity that
every emotion brings with it.
Why sceptics dislike morality. - He who takes his morality with high seriousness is angry with the sceptics in the domain of morals: for here where he is expending all his strength others are supposed  to stand astonished,  not
inquire and express  doubts.  - Then there are  natures  in whom belief in
morality is the last remnant of morality remaining to them; they likewise
oppose the sceptics,  if possible even more passionately.
Bashfulness. - All moralists are bashful, because they know that as soon as
people notice their inclinations they will be taken for spies and traitors.
Then they are in general aware of being feeble in action; for in the midst
of what they are doing their attention is largely distracted from it by the
motives behind it.
A danger to general morality. - People who  are  at  the  same  time  noble  and
honest accomplish  the feat of deifying every piece of devilry their honesty concocts and for a time making the scales of moral judgement stand still.
Bitterest error.  - It  offends  us beyond  forgiving  when we discover that
where we were convinced we were loved we were in fact regarded only
as a piece of household furniture and room decoration for the master of
the house to exercise his vanity upon before his guests.
Love and duality. - What is love but understanding and rejoicing at the fact
H U M A N ,   A L L   TOO  H U M A N
that another lives, feels and acts in a way different from and opposite to
ours? If love  is to bridge these antitheses through  joy  it  may  not  deny  or
seek  to  abolish them.  - Even  self-love  presupposes an unblendable  duality (or multiplicity) in one person.
Interpreting by dreams.  - That which  we  sometimes  do not  know  or feel
precisely  while  awake - whether  we  have  a  good  or  a  bad  conscience
towards a particular person - the dream informs us of without any ambiguity.
Excess. - The mother of excess is not joy but joylessness.
Reward and punishment. - No one utters an accusation without there being
present in his mind the thought of revenge and punishment - even when
he accuses his fate, or indeed himself. - All complaining is accusation, all
rejoicing  is  praise:  whether  we  do  the  one  or  the  other  we  are  always
making somebody  responsible.
Twice unjust. - We sometimes promote truth through a twofold injustice,
namely when,  being unable to see both sides of a thing at the same time,
we see and represent them one after the other, but in such a way that we
always  misjudge  or deny the other side in the delusion that what we are
seeing is the whole truth.
8o
Mistrust. - Mistrust of oneself does not always go  about shy and uncertain but sometimes as though mad with rage: it has got drunk so as not to tremble.
Philosophy of the parvenu. - If you want to become a person of standing you
must hold your shadow too in honour.
Knowing how to wash oneself clean. - You must learn how to emerge out of
unclean  situations  cleaner,  and  if necessary  to  wash yourself with dirty
water.
8)
Indulging oneself. - The more a person indulges himself the less others are
willing to indulge him.
The innocent knave. - The path  to  every kind of vice and knavishness is a
slow one proceeded along step by step.  He who walks it is, by the time he
reaches  its  end,  wholly free of the insect-swarms of the bad conscience,
and, although wholly infamous, he  nonetheless  goes in innocence.
2)0
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S  A N D   M A X I M S
8s
Making plans. - To  make  plans  and  project designs brings with it many
good sensations; and whoever had the strength to be nothing but a forger
of plans his whole life long would be a very happy man: but he would occasionally have  to  take a  rest  from  this activity by carrying out a  plan -
and then comes the vexation and the sobering up.
The eyes with which we behold the ideal. - Every proficient man is stuck in his
proficiency and cannot see freely beyond it. If he were not very imperfect
in other respects his virtue would prevent him from attaining to any spiritual and  moral  freedom  at all.  Our deficiencies are  the eyes with which we behold the ideal.
False praise. - We afterwards feel far more pangs of conscience over false
praise  than  we  do  over  false  blame,  probably  merely  because  with  too
great  praise  we  have compromised  our judgement  far  worse  than  with
too great, even unjust blame.
How one dies is a matter of indifference. - The whole way in which a person
thinks of death during the  high tide of his life and strength bears,  to be
sure,  very eloquent  witness  as to  that which is  called his character;  but
the hour of death itself, his bearing on the deathbed, hardly does so at all.
The exhaustion of expiring existence, especially when old people die, the
irregular or insignificant nourishment of the brain during this last period,
the occasional very bad attacks of pain, the new and untried nature of the
whole condition and all too often the coming and going of superstitious
impressions  and  fears,  as  if  dying  were  a  very  important  thing  and
bridges of the most terrible description were here being crossed - all this
does not permit us to employ dying as evidence as to the living. It is, moreover,  not true  that the dying are in general more  honest than the living: almost everyone is, rather, tempted by the solemn bearing of the bystanders, the streams of tears and feeling held back or let flow, into a now conscious, now unconscious comedy of vanity. The seriousness with which every dying person is treated has certainly been for many a poor despised
devil the most exquisite pleasure of his entire life and a kind of indemnification and part-payment for many deprivations.
Custom and its sacrifices. - The origin of custom lies in two ideas: 'the com-
munity is worth more than the individual' and 'an enduring advantage is
to be preferred to a transient one'; from which it follows that the enduring
advantage of  the  community  is  to  take  unconditional precedence over
the advantage of the individual, especially over his momentary wellbeing
but also over his enduring advantage and even over his survival. Even if
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
the individual suffers from an arrangement which benefits the whole, even
if he languishes under it,  perishes by it - the custom must be maintained
the  sacrifice  offered  up.  Such  an  attitude  originates,  however,  only  in
those who are not the sacrifice - for the latter urges that, in his own case,
the individual could be worth more than the many, likewise that present
enjoyment,  the  moment  in paradise,  is  perhaps  to  be  rated higher than
an insipid living-on in a painless condition of comfort.  The philosophy of
the sacrificial beast, however, is always noised abroad too late: and so we
continue on with custom and morality [Sittlichkeit]: which latter is nothing
other than simply a feeling for the whole content of those customs under
which we live and have been raised - and raised,  indeed,  not as an individual,  but as a  member of the  whole,  as a  cipher in a  majority.  - So it comes about that through his morality the  individual outvotes himself.
The good and the good conscience. - Do you think that every good thing has
always  had  a  good  conscience? - Science,  which  is  certainly  something
good,  entered the world  without one,  and quite destitute of pathos,  but
did so rather in secret, by crooked and indirect paths, hooded or masked
like  a  criminal  and  at least  always  with  the feeling of dealing in  contraband. The good conscience has as a preliminary stage the bad conscience
- the latter is not its opposite: for everything good was once new, consequently unfamiliar, contrary to custom, immoral, and gnawed at the heart of its fortunate inventor like a worm.
Success sanctifies the ends. - We do not hesitate to take the path to a virtue
even when we are clearly aware that the motives which impel us - utility,
personal comfort,  fear,  considerations of health,  of fame or reputation -
are  nothing  but  egoism.  These  motives  are  called  selfish  and  ignoble:
very well,  but when they incite us to a virtue - to,  for example, renunciation,  dutifulness,  orderliness,  thrift,  measure and moderation - we pay heed  to  them,  whatever  they  may be  called!  For if we attain what they
summon us to,  achieved virtue ennobles the remoter motives for our action
through  the pure air it lets us breathe and the psychical  pleasure it communicates,  and when we later perform these same actions it is no longer from the same coarse  motives  that led us to perform them before. - That
is why education ought to compel to virtue, as well as it can and according
to the nature of the pupil: virtue itself,  as the sunshine and summer air of
the soul,  may then perform its own work on the soul and bestow maturity and sweetness upon it.
Affecters of Christianity, not Christians. - Just look at your Christianity! - To
irritate  men you  praise 'God and  his saints';  and  when,  conversely,  you
desire to praise men you go to such lengths that you must irritate God and
his saints. - I wish you would at least learn Christian manners, since you
are so greatly wanting in the politeness of the Christian  heart.
A S S O RT E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
Natural features of the pious and the impious. - A wholly pious man must be
an object of reverence to us: but so must a man wholly permeated with a
sincere impiety. If with men of the latter sort we are as though in the proximity of high mountains where  the  mightiest streams have their origin, with the pious we are as though among succulent, wide-shadowed, restful trees.
Judicial murders. - The two greatest judicial murders in world  history are,
not to mince words, disguised and well disguised suicides. In both cases
the victim wanted to die; in both cases he employed the hand of human
injustice to drive the sword into his own breast.
'Love'  - The  subtlest  artifice  which  Christianity  has  over  the  other  religions  is  a  word:  it  spoke  of  love.  Thus  it  became  the  lyrical  religion (whereas in  their  two  other creations  the Semites  have given  the world
heroic-epic religions). There is in the word love something so ambiguous
and  suggestive,  something which  speaks  to  the  memory and  to  future
hope,  that even the meanest intelligence and the coldest heart still feels
something of the lustre of this word. The shrewdest woman and the commonest  man  think  when  they  hear  it  of  the  relatively  least  selfish moments of their whole life,  even if Eros  has  paid them only a  passing
visit; and those countless numbers who never experience love, of parents,
or children,  or lovers, especially however the men and women of sublimated sexuality,  have made their find in Christianity.
Realized Christianity. - Even within Christianity there exists an Epicurean
point-of-view: it proceeds from the idea that God could demand of man,
his  creature  and  likeness,  only that which  it  is possible for the  latter  to
accomplish,  and that Christian  virtue  and  perfection  must therefore be
achievable  and  frequently  achieved.  Now,  the  belief  that  we  love  our
enemy, for example - even when it is only belief, fancy, and in no way a
psychological reality (is not love,  that is to say) - undoubtedly makes us
happy so long as it really is believed (why? as to that the psychologist and
the Christian will, to be sure, think differently). And thus earthly life may,
through  the belief,  I  mean the fancy,  that one has  fulfilled  not only the
demand to love one's enemy but all other Christian demands as well, and
has really appropriated and incorporated divine perfection according to
the commandment 'be ye perfect, as your Father in Heaven is perfect', in
fact become a life of bliss.  Error is thus able to make Christ's promise come
true.
On the future of Christianity. - As to the disappearance of Christianity, and
as to which regions it will fade most slowly in, one can allow oneself a conjecture  when  one  considers  on  what  grounds  and  where  Protestantism 233
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
took root so impetuously.  As is well known, it promised to do the same
things as the old church did but to do them much cheaper: no expensive
masses  for  the  soul,  pilgrimages,  priestly  pomp  and  luxury;  it  spread
especially among the northerly nations, which were not so deeply rooted
in the symbolism and love of forms of the old church as were those of the
south:  for with the latter a  much stronger religious paganism  continued
to  live  on  in  Christianity,  while  in  the  north  Christianity  signified  a
breach  with  and  antithesis  of  the  old  native  religion  and  was from the
beginning a matter more for the head  than for the senses, though for precisely  that  reason  also  more  fanatical and defiant in times of peril.  If the uprooting  of Christianity begins  in  the  head  then  it  is  obvious  where  it
will  first  start  to  disappear:  in  precisely  the  place,  that  is  to  say,  where
it will also  defend  itself most strenuously.  Elsewhere it will bend but not
break, be stripped of its leaves but put forth new leaves in their place - because there it is the senses and  not the head  that  have  taken its side.  It is the senses, however, that entertain the belief that even meeting the cost of
the church, high though it is, is nonetheless a cheaper and more comfortable arrangement  than  existing  under  a  strict  regime  of work and  payment would be: for what price does one not place upon leisure (or lazing about  half  the  time)  once one  has  become accustomed to  it!  The  senses
raise  against  a  dechristianized  world .the  objection  that  too  much work
would have  to be  done  in it,  and the yield  of leisure would be too small:
they take the side of the occult, that is to say - they prefer to let God work
for them  (oremus nos,  deus laboret!). *
Honesty  and  play-acting  among  unbelievers.  - There  exists  no  book  that
expresses so candidly or contains such an abundance of that which does
everybody good once in a  while - the joyful enthusiasm,  ready  for any
sacrifice,  which we feel when we believe in and behold our 'truth' - than
does the book that speaks of Christ: a perspicacious man can learn from it
all  the expedients by  which a book can be made into a universal book,  a
friend of everyone,  and especially that master expedient of representing
everything  as  having  already  been  discovered,  with nothing still on  the
way  and  as yet  uncertain.  All  influential  books  try  to  leave  behind  this
kind of impression: the impression that the widest spiritual and psychical
horizon has here been circumscribed and that every star visible now or in
the future  will  have to revolve around the sun  that shines here. - Must it
therefore  not be  the  case  that  the  causes  that  make  such  books  as this
influential will render every purely scientific book poor in influence? Is the
latter  not  condemned  to  live  a  lowly  existence  among  the  lowly,  and
finally to be crucified,  never to  rise again? Are all honest men of science
not 'poor in spirit' by comparison with that which religious men proclaim
of their 'knowledge', of their 'holy' spirit? Can any religion demand more
renunciation,  draw  the egoistic  more inexorably out of themselves, than
science does? - - Thus and in  similar ways,  and in any event with a cer-
•  oremus  . . .  laboret!: let  us pray,  let God  labour!
A S S O RT E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
tain amount of play-acting, may we speak if we have to defend ourselves
before  believers;  for it  is  hardly  possible  to  conduct a  defence  without
employing some degree of play-acting.  Among ourselves,  however,  we
must  speak  more  honestly:  here  we  may  employ  a  freedom which,  in
their  own  interests,  everyone  is  not  permitted  even  to  understand.
Away, therefore, with the monk's cowl of renunciation! with the humble
mien!  Much  more  and  much  better:  that  is  how  our  truth  sounds!  If
science were not united with the joy of knowledge and the utility of what
is known,  what interest would we have in science? If a  little faith, hope
and charity  did not lead our soul towards knowledge,  what else would
draw us to science? And if the ego does indeed have no place in science,
the happy, inventive ego,  even that honest and industrious ego already
mentioned,  has  a  very  considerable  place  in  the  republic  of  scientific
men.  Respect,  the pleasure of those we  wish well or revere,  sometimes
fame  and  a  modest  personal immortality are  the  achievable  rewards  of
this depersonalization,  not  to  speak  of  lesser  objectives  and  remunerations, even though it is on their account that most have sworn and continue  to  swear  allegiance  to  the  laws  of that  republic  and  of  science  in general.  If  we  had  not  remained  to  some  extent  unscientific  men  what
meaning  could  science  possibly  have  for  us?  Taken  as  a  whole  and
expressed without qualification: to a purely cognitive being knowledge would
be a matter of indifference. - What distinguishes us from the pious and the
believers is not the quality but the quantity of belief and piety; we are contented with less. But if the former should challenge us: then be contented and  appear  to  be  contented!  - then  we  might  easily  reply:  'We  are,
indeed,  not  among  the  least  contented.  You,  however,  if  your  belief
makes  you  blessed  then  appear  to  be  blessed!  Your  faces  have  always
been more injurious to your belief than our objections have! If those glad
tidings of your Bible were written  in  your faces you would not need to
insist  so  obstinately  on  the  authority  of  that  book:  your  works,  your
actions ought continually to render the Bible superfluous,  through you a
new  Bible  ought  to  be  continually  in  course  of creation!  As  things  are,
however, all your apologies for Christianity have their roots in your lack
of  Christianity;  with  your  defence  plea  you  inscribe  your  own  bill  of
indictment. But if you should wish to emerge out of this insufficiency of
Christianity,  then  ponder  the  experience  of  two  millennia:  which,
clothed in  the  modesty  of  a  question,  speaks  thus:  "if Christ  really intended to redeem the world, must he not be said to have failed?" '
The poet as signpost to the future. - That poetic  power  available to  men  of
today  which  is not used  up in the depiction of life ought to be dedicated,
not so much to the representation of the contemporary world or to the reanimation and imaginative reconstruction of the past,  but to sign posting the future: - not,  though, as if the poet could, like a fabulous economist,
figuratively anticipate the kind of conditions nations and societies would
prosper better under and how  they could  then be brought about.  What
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
he will do, rather, is emulate the artists of earlier times who imaginatively
developed the existing images of the gods and imaginatively develop a fair
iinage of man;  he will scent out  those cases in which,  in the midst of our
modern world and reality and  without any artificial withdrawal from or
warding off of this world, the  great and beautiful soul is still possible, still
able to embody  itself in the harmonious and well-proportioned and thus
acquire  visibility,  duration  and  the  status  of a  model,  and  in  so  doing
through  the excitation of envy and  emulation  help to create the future.
The  poems  of  such  poets  will  be  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  they
appear  to  be  secluded  and  secured  against  the  fire  and  breath  of  the
passions:  the incorrigible error, the shattering of the entire human instrument, mocking laughter and gnashing of teeth, and everything tragic and comic  in  the  old  customary  sense  will  be  experienced  as  a  tedious,
archaisizing coarsening of the  human  image  when  confronted  with  his
new art.  Strength, goodness, mildness, purity and an involuntary inborn
moderation in the characters and  their actions: a level ground which it is
repose and joy to the feet to walk upon: countenances and events mirroring a luminous sky:  kn<.-wledge and art blended  to a new unity:  the spirit dwelling together with  its sister, the soul, without presumptuousness or
jealousy and evoking from what divides them not impatience and contention but a graceful seriousness: - all this would make up the general and all-embracing  golden  ground  upon  which  alone  the  tender  distinctions
between the different embodied ideals would  then constitute the actual
painting - that of the ever increasing elevation of man.  - Many a path to
this poetry of the future starts out from Goethe: but it requires good pathfinders and above all a much greater power than present-day poets - that is  to  say the  innocuous depicters of the  semi-animal and of immaturity
and  abnormality  confused with force and naturalness - possess.
The muse as Penthesilea. * - 'Rather perish than be a woman who does not
charm. '  When once the Muse thinks like that the end of her art is again in
sight.  But its termination can be tragic as well as comic.
Detour to the beautiful. - If the beautiful is at the same time the gladdening
- and the Muses once sang that it is - then the utilitarian is the frequently
necessary detour to the beautiful: it can rightly repulse the shortsighted censure of those men who cleave to the moment,  are unwilling to wait and think to attain to every good thing without a detour.
An excuse for many a fault. - The ceaseless desire to create on the part of the
artist,  together with his ceaseless observation of the world outside him,
prevent him from becoming better and more beautiful as a person, that is
to  say  from  creating  himself - except,  that  is,  if his  self-respect  is  suf-
•  Penthesilea:  in Greek mythology,  an Amazonian queen killed  by Achilles in the Trojan
war.
A S S O RT E D   O P I N I O N S  A N D  M AX I M S
ficiently great to compel him to exhibit himself before others as being as
great and beautiful as his works increasingly are.  In any event, he possesses only a fixed quantity of strength: that of it which he expends upon himself - how could he at the same time expend it on his work? - and the
reverse.
Satisfying the best. - If one has 'satisfied the best of one's age' with one's
art, this is an indication  that one will not satisfy  the best of the next age
with it: one will 'live to all future ages',  to be sure - the applause of the
best will ensure one's fame.
Of one substance. - If we are of one substance with a book or a work of art
we are quite convinced it must be excellent, and we are offended if others
find it ugly, over-spiced or inflated.
Language and feeling.  - That language  is  not given  us for the communication  of feeling  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  all  simple  men  are ashamed  to seek words for their profounder excitations:  these find expression  only  in  actions,  and  even  here  the  man  blushes  if  the  other appears to divine their motives. Among poets, to whom the gods have in
general denied this sense of shame, the nobler are nonetheless inclined to
be  monosyllabic in  the  language  of feeling and give evidence  of acting
under  constraint:  while  the  actual  poets  of feeling  are  in  practical  life
mostly quite shameless.
Error regarding privation. - He who has not long disaccustomed himself to
an art but is still at home in it has not the remotest notion how little one is
deprived of when one lives without this art.
Three-quarter strength. - If a work is to make an impression  of health  its
originator must expend at most three-quarters of his strength on it. If, on
the contrary,  he has gone to the limit of his capacity,  the tension in the
work produces in its audience a feeling of agitation and distress. All good
things  have  something  easygoing  about  them  and  lie  like  cows  in  the
meadow.
Turning away hunger. - To the hungry man delicate food is as good as but
no better than coarse: thus the more pretentious artist will never think of
inviting the hungry to his repast.
Living without art and wine. - Works of art are like wine: it is better if one
has need of neither, keeps to water and, through one's own inner fire and
sweetness  of soul,  again  and again transforms  the  water into wine  on
one's own account.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
The  robber-genius.  - The  robber-genius  in the  arts,  who  knows  how  to
deceive even discriminating spirits, originates when anyone has from his
youth on naively regarded every good thing not expressly the legal property of some particular person as free for all to plunder. Now, all the good things  of  past  ages  and  masters  lie  freely  about,  hedged  round  and
guarded  by  the reverential awe of the few who know them: by virtue of
the lack of this feeling in him,  the robber-genius is able to bid these few
defiance and to accumulate for himself an abundance of riches that itself
evokes reverence and awe in its turn.
1 1 1
To the poets of the great cities. - In the gardens of contemporary poetry one
notices that they stand too close to the sewers of the great cities:  the scent
of flowers is blended with something that betrays  nausea and putridity.
I  ask  in  sorrow:  when you  want  to baptise some  fair and innocent sensation, do you, you poets, always have to call on dirt and witticisms to be the godfathers? Do you absolutely need to set a comical devils-cap on the
head of your noble goddess? But why do you feel this need, this compulsion? - Precisely because you dwell too close to the sewers.
Of the salt of speech.  - No one  has  yet  explained why  the  Greek  writers
made so thrifty a use of the means of expression available to them in such
unheard-of  strength  and  abundance  that  every  book  that  comes  after
them  seems by comparison lurid, glaring and exaggerated. - One understands that the use of salt is more sparing both in the icy regions near the North Pole and in the hottest countries, but that the dwellers of the coasts
and  plains  in  the  more  temperate  zones  use  it  most  liberally.  Is  it  not
likely  that,  since their intellect was colder and clearer but their passions
very much more tropical than ours,  the Greeks would have had less need
of salt  and  spices  than we have?
1 13
The most liberated writer. - How, in a book for free spirits, should there be
no  mention  of Laurence  Sterne,*  whom  Goethe  honoured  as  the  most
liberated  spirit  of his century!  Let us content ourselves here  simply  with
calling him the most liberated spirit of all time, in comparison with whom
all others seem stiff,  square, intolerant and boorishly direct.  What is to be
praised in him is not the closed and transparent but the 'endless melody':
if with  this expression we  may  designate an artistic style in which the
fixed form is constantly being broken up, displaced, transposed back into
indefiniteness, so that it signifies one thing and at the same time another.
Sterne  is the  great  master of ambiguity - this word taken in  a  far  wider
sense than is usually done when it is accorded only a sexual signification.
The reader who demands to know exactly what Sterne really thinks of a
thing,  whether he is making a  serious or a laughing face,  must be given
•  Laurence Sterne (1713�8): English writer, the author of Tristram Shandy.
A S S O R T E D  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
up for  lost:  for  he  knows  how  to  encompass  both  in a  single  facial  expression; he likewise knows how,  and even wants to be in the right and in the wrong at the same time, to knot together profundity and farce. His
digressions are at the same time continuations and further developments
of the story; his aphorisms are at the same time an expression of an attitude of irony towards all sententiousness, his antipathy to seriousness is united  with  a  tendency  to  be  unable  to  regard  anything  merely  superficially. Thus he produces in the right reader a feeling of uncertainty as to whether one is walking,  standing or lying:  a  feeling,  that is,  closely related to  floating.  He,  the supplest of authors,  communicates  something of this suppleness to his reader.  Indeed, Sterne unintentionally reverses
these  roles,  and  is  sometimes  as  much  reader  as  author;  his  book  resembles a play within a play,  an audience observed by another audience.
One has to surrender unconditionally to Sterne's caprices - always in the
expectation, however, that one will not regret doing so. - It is strange and
instructive to see how as great a writer as Diderot* adopted this universal
ambiguity  of Sterne's:  though  he did  so,  of course,  ambiguously - and
thus truly in accord with the Sternean humour.  Was he,  in his Jacques le
fataliste,  imitating Sterne,  or was he mocking and parodying him? - it is
impossible  finally  to  decide:  and  perhap's  precisely  this  was  Diderot's
intention.  It is precisely this dubiety that makes the French unjust to one
of their greatest masters (who can challenge comparison with any other
of any time): for the French are too serious for humour, and especially for
this  taking of humour  humorously.  - Is  it necessary  to  add  that,  of all
great writers,  Sterne is the worst model, the author who ought least to be
imitated, or that even Diderot had to pay for the risk he took? That which
good  French  writers,  and  before  them  certain  Greeks  and  Romans,
wanted  and  were able to  do  in prose is  precisely  the opposite of what
Sterne wants and is able to  do: for, as the masterly  exception,  he raises
himself  above  that  which  all  artists  in  writing  demand  of  themselves:
discipline, compactness, simplicity, restraint in motion and deportment.
- Unhappily, Sterne the man seems to have been only too closely related
to  Sterne  the  writer:  his  squirrel-soul  leaped  restlessly from branch  to
branch; he was familiar with everything from the sublime to the rascally;
he had sat everywhere,  and always with the same shamelessly watering
eyes and play of sensibility on his features. If language does not start back
at such a juxtaposition,  he  possessed  a  hard-hearted  good-naturedness;
and  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  baroque,  indeed  depraved  imagination  he
almost exhibited the  bashful  charm  of  innocence.  Such an ambiguousness become flesh and  soul,  such a  free-spiritedness in every fibre and muscle  of the body,  have as  he  possessed  these qualities perhaps been
possessed by no other man.
Select  reality.  - Just  as the  good  prose-writer  employs  only  words  that
•  Denis Diderot (1713--84): French essayist and dramatist; a leading spirit of the Enlightenment.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
belong to common speech, but by no means all the words that belong to it
- this is precisely how select or high style originates - so the good poet of
the future will depict only reality and completely ignore all those fantastic,
superstitious, half-mendacious,  faded subjects upon which earlier poets
demonstrated their powers.  Only reality, but by no means every reality! he will depict a select reality!
Degenerate varieties of art. - Beside the genuine species of art, those of great
repose and those of great motion, there exist degenerate varieties - art in
search of repose and excited and agitated art: both would like their weakness  to  be  taken  for  strength  and  that  they  themselves  should  be  mistaken for the genuine species.
No colours for painting the hero. - Poets and artists who really belong to the
present  love  to  lay  their  colours  on  to  a  background  flickering  in  red,
green,  grey  and  gold,  on to the background  of  nervous  sensuality: in this
the  children  of  this  century are  skilled.  The  disadvantage  of it  - if one
beholds  these paintings  with  eyes  other  than  those  of this  century  - is
that when they paint their grandest figures they seem to have something
flickering,  trembling,  giddy  about them: so that one simply cannot credit
them with heroic deeds, but at the most with boastful misdeeds posing as
heroism.
Overladen .  - The  florid  style  in  art  is  the  consequence  of a  poverty  of
organizing power in the face of a  superabundance of means and ends. -
In the earliest stages of art we sometimes find the exact opposite.
1 18
Pulchrum est paucorum hominum. * - History and experience tell us that the
monstrosity  which  secretly  rouses  the  imagination and bears  it beyond
actuality and the everyday is older and of more abundant growth than the
beautiful and the cult of beauty in art - and that if the sense for the beautiful grows dim  it at once breaks exuberantly  out again.  It seems  that the great majority of men have greater need of it than they do of the beautiful:
no doubt because it contains a stronger narcotic.
Origins of the taste for works of art. - If we think of the original germs of the
artistic  sense  and  ask  ourselves  what  different  kinds  of  pleasure  are
evoked by the firstlings of art, for example among savage peoples, we discover first of all the pleasure of understanding what another means; here art is a  kind  of solving of a  riddle  that  procures  for the solver enjoyment  of
his own quick perspecuity. - Then,  the rudest work of art calls to mind
that which has been pleasurable in actual experience and to this extent produces  present  pleasure,  for example  whenever the artist has depicted a
•  Pulchrum  . . .  homin um: Beauty is for the few.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
hunt,  a  victory,  a  wedding.  - Again,  what  is represented  can  arouse,
move,  enflame  the  auditor,  for  example  through  the  glorification  of
revenge or  danger.  Here the pleasure lies in the  arousal  as  such,  in the
victory over boredom. - Even recollection of the unpleasurable, insofar as
it has been overcome, or insofar as it makes us ourselves interesting to the
auditor as a subject of art (as when a minstrel describes the misfortunes of
an intrepid  seafarer),  can produce great pleasure, which pleasure is then
attributed  to  art.  - That  pleasure  which  arises  at  the  sight  of  anything
regular and symmetrical in  lines,  points,  rhythms,  is already of a  more
refined sort;  for a  certain similarity in appearance evokes the  feeling for
everything orderly and regular in  life which alone we  have,  after all,  to
thank  for  all  our  wellbeing:  in  the  cult  of  symmetry  we  thus  unconsciously honour regularity and proportion as the source of our happiness hitherto;  pleasure  is  a  kind  of  prayer  of  thanksgiving.  Only  when  we
have become to  some  extent satiated  with  this  last-mentioned  pleasure
does there arise the even subtler feeling that enjoyment might also lie in
breaking  through  the  orderly  and  symmetrical;  when,  for  example,  it
seems enticing to seek the rational in the apparently irrational:  whereby
this feeling is then, as a kind of reading of aesthetic riddles, revealed as a
higher species of the pleasure in art referred to first of all. - Whoever continues on in this train of thought will realize what kind of hypotheses for the explanation of aesthetic phenomena are here being avoided on principle.
Not too close. - It is a disadvantage for good ideas if they follow upon one
another  too  quickly;  they  get  in  one  another's  way.  - That  is  why  the
greatest  artists  and  writers  have  always  made  abundant  use  of  the
mediocre.
Coarseness and weakness. - Artists of all ages have made the discovery that
a certain strength lies in coarseness,  and that many who would no doubt
like to be coarse are unable to be  so; they have likewise discovered that
many kinds of weakness make a  strong impression on the feelings. From
these discoveries there have been derived not a few artifices and surrogates which even the greatest and most conscientious artists have found it hard wholly to abstain from.
Good  memory.  - Many a  man  fails  to become a  thinker only because his
memory is too good.
Making hungry instead of stilling hunger. - Great artists believe that through
their art they have taken a soul entirely into their possession and filled it
utterly: in truth, and often to their painful disappointment, this soul has
only been rendered all the more spacious and unfillable, so that now ten
greater artists could plunge into its depths without satisfying it.
H U M A N ,   A L L   TOO  H U M A N
Artist's fear. - The  fear  that the figures  they create will  not  produce  the
appearance of being alive can  mislead artists  of declining taste  into  constructing them in such a way that they behave as though mad: just as,  on the other hand,  the  same fear induced the Greek artists of the first dawn
to  bestow  even  on  the  dying  and  the  gravely  injured  that  smile which
they knew to be the liveliest indication of life - quite unconcerned at what
such people on the edge of life would look like in reality.
The circle must be closed. - He who has followed a philosophy or a species
of art to the end of its course and then around the end will grasp from his
inner  experience  why  the  masters  and  teachers  who  came  afterwards
turned  away  from  it,  often  with  an  expression  of  deprecation.  For,
though  the  circle  has  to  be  circumscribed,  the  individual,  even  the
greatest,  sits  firmly  on  his  point  of  the  periphery  with  an  inexorable
expression of obstinacy, as though the circle ought never to be closed.
Art of the  past  and  the  soul  of  the  present.  - Because  every  art  becomes
capable of expressing states of soul with ever increasing suppleness and
refinement, with  greater and  greater passion and intensity,  later masters
spoiled  by  these  means  of expression  feel  a  sense  of discomfort  in  the
presence of works of art of earlier ages, as though  what was wrong with
the ancients was merely that they lacked these means of expressing their
souls clearly,  or perhaps even were missing only a few technical accomplishments;  and  they think they  have  to  put things right here - for they believe  in  the  equality,  indeed  in  the  complete  unity of souls.  In truth,
however, the soul of this  master himself was a different soul, greater perhaps,  but in any  case colder and  still averse to what we find stimulating and lively:  moderation,  symmetry, contempt for the joyful and pleasing,
an  unconscious  astringency  and  morning  chilliness,  an  avoidance  of
passion as  though  it will  prove  the  ruin  of art - this  is what constituted
the  mind  and  morality  of  the  older  masters,  and  they  selected  and
breathed life into their means of expression,  not by chance but of necessity,  in  accordance  with the  same  morality.  - But does  this  insight mean we have to deny those who come later the right to reanimate the works of
earlier  times  with  their  own souls? No,  for  it is only if we bestow  upon
them our soul  that  they can continue to live: it is only our blood that constrains them to speak to us. A truly 'historical' rendition would be ghostly speech  before  ghosts.  - We  honour  the  great  artists  of  the  past  less
through  that unfruitful awe which  allows every word,  every note,  to lie
where  it  has  been  put  than  we  do  through  active  endeavours  to  help
them to come repeatedly to life again. - To be sure, if we were to imagine
Beethoven suddenly returning and hearing one of his works rendered in
the animated and nervous manner for which our masters of performance
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
are celebrated,  he would probably for a long time stay dumb,  undecided
whether to raise his hand in a blessing or a curse, but at length say perhaps: 'Well, yes! That is neither I nor not-I but some third thing - and if it is not exactly  right,  it is nonetheless right in  its  own  way.  But you  had
better take care what you're doing, since it's you who have to listen to it and,  as our Schiller  says,  the living are  always  in  the  right.  So  be in the right and let me depart again.'
Against the censurers of brevity. - Something said briefly can be the fruit of
much long thought: but the reader who is a novice in this field, and has as
yet reflected  on  it  not at all,  sees in  everything  said briefly  something
embryonic,  not without censuring the author for having served him up
such immature and unripened fare.
Against  the shortsighted.  - Do  you  think  this work must be  fragmentary
because I give it to you  (and  have to give it to you) in fragments?
Readers of maxims. - The worst readers of maxims are the friends of their
author when they are exercised  to  trace  the general observation back to
the particular event  to which the maxim  owes its origin: for through this
prying they render all the author's efforts null and void,  so that, instead
of  philosophical  instruction,  all  they  receive  (and  all  they  deserve  to
receive) is the satisfaction of a vulgar curiosity.
1)0
Reader's  ill breeding.  - Two  kinds  of ill breeding exhibited by  the  reader
towards the author are to praise his second book at the expense of his first
(or the reverse) and at the same time to demand that the author should be
grateful to him.
1)1
The seditious in the history of art. - If we follow the history of an art, that of
Greek  rhetoric  for instance,  as  we  proceed  from  master to  master and
behold the ever increasing care expended on obedience to all the ancient
rules and self-limitations and to those added subsequently, we are aware
of a painful tension in ourselves:  we grasp that the bow has to break and
that the so-called inorganic  composition  bedecked and masked with the
most marvellous means of expression - the baroque style of Asia,  that is
to say - was sooner or later a necessity and almost an act of charity.
1)2
To the great  men of art.  - That enthusiasm  for  a  cause  which  you,  great
men, bear into the world cripples the reason of many others. To know this
is humbling.  But the enthusiast wears his  hump with pride and joy:  to
this  extent  you  have  the  consolation  of  knowing  that  through  you  the
amount of happiness in the world is increased.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Those with no aesthetic conscience. - The actual fanatics of an artistic faction
are those completely inartistic natures who have not penetrated even the
elements of artistic theory or practice but are moved in the strongest way
by all the elemental effects of an  art.  For them there is no such thing as an
aesthetic  conscience  - and  therefore  nothing  to  hold  them  back  from
fanaticism.
How modern music is supposed to make the soul move. - The artistic objective
pursued by  modern  music  in  what  is now,  in a  strong but  nonetheless
obscure  phrase,  designated  'endless  melody'  can  be  made  clear by  imagining one is going into the sea, gradually relinquishing a firm tread on the  bottom  and  finally  surrendering unconditionally to  the watery element:  one  is  supposed  to  swim.  Earlier music constrained one - with  a delicate or solemn or fiery movement back and forth,  faster and slower to dance: in pursuit of which the needful preservation of orderly measure compelled the soul of the listener to a confinual self-possession: it was upon
the  reflection of the cooler air produced by  this  self-possession  and  the
warm breath of musical enthusiasm that the charm of this music rested. -
Richard Wagner desired a different kind of movement of the soul: one related, as aforesaid, to  swimming and floating.  Perhaps this is the most essential of his innovations.  The celebrated  means he employs,  appropriate to this desire  and  sprung from  it - 'endless melody' - endeavours to break
up all mathematical symmetry of tempo and force and sometimes even to
mock it;  and he is abundantly inventive in the production of effects which
to  the  ear  of  earlier  times  sound  like  rhythmic  paradoxes  and  blasphemies.  What  he  fears  is  petrifaction,  crystallization,  the  transition  of music  into  the  architectonic - and  thus  with a  two-four rhythm he will
juxtapose  a  three-four  rhythm,  often  introduce  bars  in  five-four  and
seven-four rhythm, immediately repeat a phrase but expanded to two or
three  times  its original length.  A complacent imitation of such an art as
this can be a great danger to music: close beside such an over-ripeness of
the feeling for rhythm there has  always lain in wait the brutalization and
decay of rhythm itself.  This danger is especially great when such music
leans more and more on a wholly naturalistic art of acting and language
of gesture  uninfluenced  and  uncontrolled by  any higher plastic art:  for
such an art  and  language possesses in itself no limit or proportion, and is
thus  unable  to  communicate limit and  proportion  to  that  element  that
adheres to it, the all too feminine nature of music.
Poet  and  reality.  - When  a  poet  is  not  in  love  with  reality  his  muse  will
consequently not be reality,  and she will then bear him hollow-eyed and
fragile-limbed children.
Means and ends.  - In art the end does  not sanctify the means: but sacred
means can here sanctify the end.
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S  A N D  M A X I M S
The worst readers. - The worst readers are those who behave like plundering troops: they take away a few things they can use, dirty and confound the remainder, and revile the whole.
Marks of the good writer. - Good writers have two things in common: they
prefer to  be  understood  rather than admired;  and  they do not write for
knowing and over-acute readers.
The mixed genres.  - The  mixed genres in art bear witness to  the mistrust
their originators felt towards  their own  powers;  they sought assistants,
advocates, hiding-places - for example, the poet who calls on philosophy
for aid,  the composer who calls on the drama,  the thinker who calls on
rhetoric.
Shutting his mouth.  - When his work opens its mouth,  the author has to
shut his.
Insignia of rank. - All poets and writers enamoured of the superlative want
to do more than they can.
Cold books. - The good thinker counts on readers who appreciate the happiness that lies in good thinking: so that a book distinguished by coldness and sobriety can, when viewed through the right eyes, appear as though
played about by the sunshine of spiritual cheerfulness and as a true comfort for the soul.
Artifices of the ponderous. - The ponderous thinker usually chooses garrulousness  or  pomposity  for  his  allies:  through  the  former  he  thinks  to appropriate to  himself flexibility and  fleetness of foot,  through the latter
he makes it appear  as though his quality were a  product of free will,  of
artistic intention, with the object of achieving the dignity that slowness of
movement promotes.
On the baroque style. - He who knows that, as a thinker or writer, he was
not born or educated for dialectics and the analysis of ideas will involuntarily reach  for the  rhetorical and dramatic: for in the long run what he is concerned  with  is  to  make  himself  understood  and  thereby  to  acquire
force, its being a matter of indifference to him whether he conducts sensibilities  towards  him  along  a  level  path  or  overtakes  them  unawares  -
either as a shepherd or a brigand. This applies to the plastic as much as to
the poetic arts; where the feeling of a  lack of dialectics or inadequacy in
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
expressive or narrative ability,  combined with an over-abundant,  pressing formal impulsion, gives rise to that stylistic genre called the baroque. -
Only the ill-instructed and presumptuous, by the way, will at once feel a
sense of contempt at the sound of this word. The baroque style originates
whenever any great art starts to fade, whenever the demands in the art of
classic expression grow too great, as a natural event which one may well
behold with sorrow - for it means night is coming - but at the same time
with  admiration  for  the  substitute  arts  of  expression  and  narration
peculiar  to  it.  To  these  belong  the  choice  of material and  themes  of the
highest  dramatic  tension  of  a  kind  that  make  the  heart  tremble  even
without the assistance of art because  they bring Heaven and Hell all too
close: then the eloquence of strong emotions and gestures, of the sublime
and  ugly,  of  great  masses,  of  quantity  as  such  - as  was  already  proclaimed in the case of Michelangelo,  the  father or grandfather of the artists  of  the  Italian  baroque  - :  the  glow  of  twilight,  transfiguration  or conflagration upon such  strongly constructed forms:  in addition a continual  daring  experimentation  in  new  methods  and  objectives,  strongly underlined  by  the  artist  for  other  artists,  while  the  laity  are  obliged  to
think they behold  a constant involuntary overflowing of all the cornucopias of a primeval art born of nature: all these qualities in which this style possesses its greatness are not possible, not permitted, in the earlier, preclassical and classical epochs of a species of art:  such delicacies hang long on the tree as forbidden fruit. - It is precisely now, when music is entering
this  last epoch,  that we can get to know the phenomenon of the baroque
style in a  particularly  splendid form  and learn a  great  deal about earlier
ages through  comparison with  it:  for a baroque style has already existed
many times from the age of the Greeks onwards - in poetry, rhetoric,  in
prose  style,  in sculpture,  as well as  in architecture - and,  although  this
style  has  always  lacked  the  highest  nobility  and  an  innocent,  unconscious,  victorious perfection, it has nonetheless satisfied many of the best and  most  serious  of  its  age:  which  is  why  I  called  it  presumptuous
straightaway  to  judge  it  with  contempt;  even  though  he  whose  receptivity for the purer and greater style is not blunted by it may count himself lucky.
Value of honest books.  - Honest books make the reader honest, at least to
the  extent that  they lure o:tt his  antipathy  and  hatred,  which cunning
prudence  otherwise  knows  best  how  to  conceal.  Against  a  book,  however,  we may let ourselves go, however much we may restrain ourselves when it comes to men.
How  art  creates  a  faction.  - Individual  beautiful  passages,  an  exciting
overall effect and a rapturous mood at the end - this much in a work of art
is accessible even to most of the laity: and in an artistic period in which it
is desired to draw over the great mass of the laity to the side of the artist to create a faction, that is to say, perhaps for the purpose of preserving art
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
as such - the creator will do well to give no more than this: otherwise he
will squander his strength in areas where no one will thank him for it. For
to  do what remains undone - to imitate nature in its organic growth and
shaping - would in any case be  to scatter seed on water.
Growing great to the prejudice of history. - Every  later master who leads the
taste of those who appreciate art on to his path involuntarily gives rise to a
reordering and  new  assessment  of the  earlier  masters  and  their  works:
that in them which is attuned and related to him, which constitutes a foretaste and annunciation of him, henceforth  counts  as that which is really significant in them and in  their works - a fruit  in which there  is  usually
concealed a great worm of error.
How an age is lured to art. - If, with the aid of all the magical tricks of artist
and thinker, one teaches men to feel reverence for their deficiencies,  their
spiritual poverty, their senseless infatuations and passions - and this can
be done - if one exhibits only the sublime aspect of crime and madness,
only what is moving and heart-touching in the weakness of the will-less
and blindly devoted - this too has happened often enough - :  then one
has acquired the means of imbuing even a wholly inartistic and unphilosophical  age  with  a love of philosophy  and  art  (and  especially of artists and  philosophers  as  persons)  and,  under  unfavourable  circumstances,
perhaps the  sole means of preserving the existence of such delicate and
imperilled creatures.
Joy and criticism. - Criticism, onesided and unjust criticism just as much as
judicious,  gives  him  who  practises  it  so  much  pleasure  that  the  world
owes a debt of gratitude to every work,  every action that invites a great
deal of criticism from a great many people: for behind it it drags a glittering tail of joy,  wit, self-admiration,  pride,  instruction and intention to do better. - The god of joy created the bad and mediocre for the same reason
he created the good.
Beyond  his limits.  - When  an  artist  wants  to be  more  than  an  artist,  for
example the moral awakener of his nation, the retribution is that he ends
up enamoured of a moral monster - and the muse laughs at him: for this
goddess, otherwise so good-hearted, can grow malicious out of jealousy.
Consider Milton and Klopstock. *
Glass eye. - A  gift for moral subjects,  characters, motives directed upon the
beautiful soul of a work of art is sometimes only the glass eye which the
artist who lacks a beautiful soul inserts into himself: the consequence  can
•  Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock (1724-18o3): German poet, often alluded to in his lifetime as
the 'German Milton' .
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O  H U M A N
be, though rarely is, that this eye at length becomes living nature, even if
somewhat jaundiced nature - the usual consequence, however, is that all
the world thinks it sees nature where there is only glass.
Writing and the desire for victory. - Writing ought always to advertise a victory  - an  overcoming  of oneself which  has  to  be  communicated  for the benefit of others;  but there are  dyspeptic  authors  who write only when
they cannot  digest something,  indeed when it is still stuck in their teeth:
they involuntarily seek to transfer their own annoyance to the reader and
in this way exercise power over him: that is to say, they too desire victory,
but over others.
'A good book  takes  its  time. ' - Every good book  tastes astringent when it
appears: it possesses the fault of newness. In addition it is harmed by its
living  author if he is celebrated and much is known about him: for all the
world is accustomed to confound the author with his work. What there is
of spirit,  sweetness  and  goodness in the latter can evolve only over the
years,  under  the  care  of  growing,  then  established,  finally  traditional
reverence.  Many  hours  must  pass over it,  many a spider have spun her
web on it.  Good readers continually improve a book and good opponents
clarify it.
Extravagance as an artistic method. - Artists well understand what it means
to employ extravagance as an artistic method so as to produce an impression of wealth. It is among the innocent subterfuges for seducing the soul which  artists  have  to be  skilled  in:  for  in  their  world,  in  which  what  is
aimed  at is appearance,  the methods by which appearance is  produced
do not necessarily have to be  genuine.
The hidden barrel-organ. - Geniuses know better than the talented how to
hide  the  barrel-organ,  by virtue of their  more  abundant drapery;  but  at
bottom they too  can  do no  more  than repeat their same old tunes.
The  name  on  the  title-page.  - That  the  name  of  the  author  should  be
inscribed on the book is now customary and almost a duty; yet it is one of
the main reasons books produce so little effect. For if they are good, then,
as  the  quintessence  of the  personality  of  their  authors,  they  are  worth
more than these; but as soon as the author announces himself on the titlepage,  the reader  at once dilutes the quintessence again  with the personality,  indeed  with  what is most  personal,  and  thus  thwarts  the object of the  book.  It is the intellect's  ambition  to seem no longer to belong to an
individual.
Sharpest criticism. - We criticize a  man or a book most sharply when we
sketch out  their ideal.
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M AX I M S
Few and without love. - Every good book is written for a definite reader and
those like him, and for just this reason will be viewed unfavourably by all
other readers,  the great  majority:  which is why its reputation rests on a
narrow  basis  and  can  be  erected  only  slowly.  - The  mediocre  and bad
book is so because it tries to please many and does please them.
Music and sickness. - The danger inherent in modern music lies in the fact
that it sets the chalice of joy and grandeur so seductively to our lips and
with such a show of moral ecstasy that even the noble and self-controlled
always drink from it a drop too  much.  This minimal  intemperance,  continually  repeated,  can  however  eventuate  in  a  profounder  convulsion and  undermining  of  spiritual  health  than  any  coarser  excess  is  able  to
bring about:  so that there is in the end nothing for it but one day to flee
the nymph's grotto* and to make one's way through the perils of the sea
to foggy Ithaca and to the arms of a simpler and more human wife.
Advantage for the opponent. - A book full of spirit communicates some of it
to its opponents too.
Youth and criticism. - To criticize a book means to a young person no more
than  to  repulse  every  single  productive  idea  it  contains  and  to  defend
oneself against it tooth and claw. A youth lives in a condition of perpetual
self-defence against everything new that he cannot love wholesale,  and
in  this condition  perpetrates  a  superfluous  crime against it  as  often  as
ever he can.
Effect of quantity. - The greatest paradox in the history of poetry lies in the
fact that in everything in which the old poets possess their greatness one
can be a barbarian, that is to  say erroneous and deformed from head to
toe, and yet still be the greatest of poets. For such is the case with Shakespeare, who, when compared with Sophocles, resembles a mine full of an immeasurable  quantity  of gold,  lead and  rubble,  while  the  latter is  not
merely gold but gold in so noble a form its value as metal almost comes to
be forgotten.  But quantity raised to the highest pitch has the effect of quality. That fact benefits Shakespeare.
All beginnings are dangerous. - The poet has the choice of either raising the
feelings from one step to the next and thus eventually raising them very
high - or attempting an assault on them and pulling on the bellrope with
all his force from the very beginning. Both courses have their dangers: in
the former instance his listeners may perhaps desert him out of boredom,
in the latter out of fear.
•  Nymph's grotto: reference to Odysseus' seduction by and stay with the nymph Calypso.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
In favour of critics. - Insects sting, not out of malice, but because they too
want to live: likewise our critics; they want, not to hurt  us,  but to take our
blood.
Maxims and their outcome. - When a maxim straightaway impresses them
with  its  simple  truth,  the  inexperienced  always believe  it to  be  old  and
familiar, and they look askance at its author as though he has desired to
steal for himself what is common property: whereas they take pleasure in
spiced-up half-truths and make  this fact known to the author. The latter
knows how to evaluate such a hint and has no difficulty in divining from
it where he has succeeded and  where  failed.
Desire for victory. - An artist who in all he undertakes exceeds his powers
will nonetheless at last draw the crowd along with him through the spectacle  of a mighty  struggle  he  affords:  for  success is accorded not only to victory but sometimes to  the  desire  for victory too.
Sibi scribere. * - The sensible author writes for no other posterity than his
own, that is to say for his old age, so that then too he will be able to take
pleasure in himself.
In praise of the maxim. - A good maxim is too hard for the teeth of time and
whole  millennia  cannot consume it,  even though  it  serves  to  nourish
every age: it is thus the great paradox of literature,  the imperishable in the
midst  of change,  the  food  that  is  always  in  season,  like  salt  - though,
unlike salt,  it never loses its savour.
Artistic need of the second rank. - The people no doubt possesses something
that might be called an artistic need,  but it is small and cheap to satisfy.
The  refuse  of art  is  at bottom  all  that  is  required:  we  should  honestly
admit that to ourselves. Just consider, for instance, the kind of songs and
tunes the most vigorous,  soundest and most naive strata of our populace
nowadays  take  true  delight  in,  dwell among shepherds,  cowherds,  farmers,  huntsmen,  soldiers,  seamen,  and  then  supply  yourself  with  an answer. And in the small town, in precisely the homes that are the seat of
those civic virtues inherited from of old, do they not love,  indeed dote on,
the very worst music in any way produced today? Whoever talks of a profound  need  for  art,  of  an  unfulfilled  desire  for  art,  on  the  part  of  the people as it is, is either raving or lying. Be honest! Nowadays it is only in
exceptional men that there exists an artistic need of an exalted kind - because
art  as  such  is  again  in decline  and  the powers  and expectations of men
•  Sibi scribere: To write for oneself.
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
have for a time been directed at other things. - In addition, that is to say
apart from the people, there does indeed still exist a broader, more extensive artistic need in the higher and highest strata of society, but it is of the second  rank.  Here  something  like  a  seriously  intentioned  artistic  community is possible: but just look at what elements it consists of! They are, generally speaking, the more refined discontented unable to take any real
pleasure in themselves: the cultivated who have not become sufficiently
free  to  do without  the consolations of religion and yet find its oil  insufficiently  sweet-scented:  the  half-noble  who  are  too  weak  to  correct  the one fundamental  mistake of their life or the harmful inclinations of their
character  through  a  heroic  conversion  or  abstinence:  the  richly  gifted
who  think  themselves  too  fine  for  modest  useful activities  and  are  too
indolent for a serious,  self-sacrificing labour: the girl who does not know
how to create for herself a satisfying circle of duties:  the woman who has
tied herself to a frivolous or mischievous marriage and knows she is not
tied to  it  tightly  enough:  the  scholar,  physician,  merchant,  official who
became one too soon and whose nature has as a whole never been given
free  rein,  and who pays for this by  performing his duties efficiently but
with a worm in his heart: finally, all the imperfect and defective artists - it
is these  who  now  still  possess  a  true artistic  need!  And  what  is it  they
really desire of art? That it shall scare away their discontent, boredom and
uneasy conscience for moments or hours at a time and if possible magnify
the errors of their life and character into errors of world-destiny - being in
this very different from the Greeks, to whom their art was an outflowing
and overflowing of their own healthiness and wellbeing and who loved
to view their perfection repeated outside themselves: - self-enjoyment was
what led  them  to  art,  whereas what  leads our contemporaries  to  it is -
self-disgust.
The Germans in the theatre. - The real theatrical talent among the Germans
has been Kotzebue;" he  and his Germans, those of the higher as well as
those of middle-class society, necessarily belonged together, and his contemporaries could have said of him in all seriousness: 'in him we live and move  and  have  our being'.  Here  there  was  nothing  forced,  imaginary,
only half enjoyed: what he desired and could do was comprehended; to
the present day, indeed, genuine theatrical success on the German stage is
in the possession of the admitted or unadmitted inheritors of Kotzebue's
methods and effects,  especially wherever comedy is still to some extent
flourishing; from which it appears that much of the German character of
that  time  still  lives  on,  particularly  away  from  the  great  cities.  Goodnatured,  intemperate in small pleasures,  eager for tears, with the desire to  be  allowed  to  throw  off  an  inborn,  dutiful  sobriety  at  least  in  the
theatre and here to practise a smiling, indeed laughing tolerance, confusing  goodness  with  pity  and  mingling  them  together  - for  such  is  the
•  Kotzebue:  August  Friedrich  von  Kotzebue  (176t-t819),  the  most  prolific  and  popular
German dramatist of his time.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
essence of German sentimentality - delighted with a fair,  magnanimous
action,  for  the  rest  subservient  towards  those  above,  envious  towards
one another,  and  yet in  the  depths of them  self-satisfied  - that  is  how
they were,  that is how he was. - The second theatrical talent was Schiller:
he discovered a class of auditors who had  previously not come into consideration;  he  found them among the  immature,  in German youths and girls.  With his works he came out to meet their higher, nobler, stormier,
even if vague impulses, their pleasure in the jangle of moral expressions
(which tends to fade in the thirties), and by virtue of the passionateness
and  thirst  for:  taking  sides  that  characterizes  this  age-group  achieved  a
success  that  gradually  produced  a  favourable  impression  on  those  of
maturer age  too:  in general, Schiller rejuvenated the  Germans.  - Goethe
stood above the Germans in every respect and still stands above them: he
will never belong to them.  How could a people ever be equal to Goethean
spirituality  in  wellbeing  and  well-wishing!  Just  as  Beethoven  composed
music  above  the  heads  of the  Germans,  just  as  Schopenhauer  philosophized above the heads of the  Germans,  so Goethe wrote his Tasso, his Iphigenie, above the heads of the Germans.  His following was composed
of a very small band of the most highly cultivated people, educated by antiquity,  life  and  travels,  and  grown  beyond  the  confines  of the  merely German: - he himself did not desire  it otherwise. - When the romantics
then established their cult of Goethe, whose aim they were well aware of;
when  their  astonishing  accomplishment  in  tasting  everything  passed
over to  the  pupils  of Hegel,  the actual educators of the Germans of this
century;  when  awakening  national  ambition  also  came  to  benefit  the
fame of German  poets,  and the  actual standard  applied  by  the  people,
which is whether they can honestly say they enjoy something, was inexorably  subordinated  to  the judgement of individuals and  to  that  national ambition - that is to say, when one began to feel compelled to enjoy - then
there  arose  that  mendaciousness  and  spuriousness  in  German  culture
which  felt  ashamed  of Kotzebue,  which  put  Sophocles,  Calder6n  and
even  Goethe's  continuation of Faust on the stage, and which on account
of its furred tongue and congested stomach in the end no longer knows
what it likes  and  what  it  finds boring.  - Blessed are  those who possess
taste,  even  though  it be  bad  taste! - And  not only  blessed:  one  can  be
wise,  too,  only by virtue of this quality; which is  why  the Greeks,  who
were  very subtle  in such  things,  designated  the  wise  man with a word
that signifies the man of taste, and called wisdom,  artistic and practical as
well as theoretical and intellectual, simply 'taste' (sophia).
Music as the late fruit of every culture. - Of all the arts that grow up on a particular cultural soil under particular social and political conditions, music makes its appearance last, in the autumn and deliquescence of the culture
to which it belongs: at a time when the first signs and harbingers of a new
spring  are  as  a  rule  already  perceptible;  sometimes,  indeed,  music  resounds into a new and astonished world  like the language of an age that
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S  A N D  M A X I M S
has vanished and arrives too late. It was only in the art of the musicians of
the Netherlands that the soul of the Christian Middle  Ages found its full
resonance:  their tonal  architecture  is  the  posthumous but genuine  and
equal  sister of the  Gothic.  It was only in the  music of Handel  that there
sounded  the  best  that  the  soul  of  Luther  and  his  like  contained,  the
mighty Jewish-heroic impulse that created the whole Reformation movement. It was only Mozart who gave forth the age of Louis the Fourteenth and the art of Racine and Claude Lorraine* in ringing gold.  It was only in
the  music  of  Beethoven  and  Rossini  that  the  eighteenth  century  sang
itself out:  the century  of enthusiasm, of shattered ideals and of fleeting
happiness. So that a friend of delicate metaphors might say that all truly
meaningful music is swan-song. - Music is thus not a universal language
for all ages, as has so often been claimed for it, but accords precisely with
a measure of time,  warmth and sensibility that a quite distinct individual
culture,  limited as to area and duration, bears within it as an inner law:
the music of Palestrina would be wholly inaccessible to a Greek, and conversely - what would Palestrina hear in the music of Rossini? - Perhaps our  latest  German  music  too,  dominant  and  thirsting  for  dominance
though it is, will in a short time cease to be understood: for it arose from a
culture that is going speedily downhill; its  soil  is that period of reaction
and recuperation in which a certain catholicity of feeling together with a joy
in everything primevally national came into flower and exuded a mingled
odour  over  Europe:  both  of  which  directions  of  sensibility,  comprehended  in  their  greatest  intensity  and  pursued  to  their  farthest  limits, finally became audible in  the  art of Wagner.  Wagner's appropriation of
the old Germanic sagas, his ennobling disposing of the strange gods and
heroes contained in them - who are actually sovereign beasts of prey with
occasional  impulses  to  thoughtfulness,  magnanimity  and  worldweariness  - the  reanimation  of  these  figures,  to  whom  he  added  the Christian-medieval  thirst  for  ecstatic  sensuality  and  asceticism,  this
entire Wagnerian  giving  and  taking  in  regard  to  subject-matter,  souls,
forms and words, would also be clearly expressed in the spirit of his music
if, in common with all music, it were able to speak of itself with complete
unambiguity:  this  spirit  wages  the  ultimate war  of reaction  against  the
spirit  of  the  Enlightenment  wafted  across  from  the  preceding  century
into this,  likewise against the supra-national ideas of French revolutionary  enthusiasm  and  English-American  sobriety in the reconstruction  of state and society. - But is it not evident that these  spheres of ideas and
feelings - here seemingly still repressed by Wagner himself and by his
adherents - have long since regained the upper hand, and that this late
musical protest against them sounds mostly into ears that prefer to hear
other and antithetical tones? So that this wonderful and elevated art will
one day quite suddenly become incomprehensible and covered in forgetfulness and cobwebs. - One must not allow oneself to be misled as to this state of affairs by the fleeting fluctuations that appear as a reaction within
reaction, as a temporary sinking of the wave-crest in the midst of the total
•  Claude Lorraine: adoptive name of Claude GeUee (16oo-82): French landscape painter
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
movement;  thus it may be  that the  subtler after-effects of this decade of
national  wars,  ultramontane  martyrdom*  and  socialist  uneasiness  may
assist the above-named art to a sudden radiance of glory - without, however,  therewith  supplying  it  with  a  guarantee  of  'having  a  future',  let alone of possessing the future. - It lies in the nature of music that the fruits
of its great cultural vintages grow unpalatable more quickly and are more
speedily ruined than  the fruits of the plastic arts, let alone those that have
ripened  on  the  tree  of knowledge:  for of all  the  products  of the  human
artistic sense ideas are the most enduring and durable.
Poets no longer teachers.  - Strange though it may sound to our age, there
were  once  poets  and  artists  whose  souls were beyond  the passions and
their raptures and convulsions and who therefore  took pleasure in purer
materials,  worthier men,  more delicate combinations and resolutions.  If
today's great artists  are mostly unchainers of the will and for that reason
under  certain  circumstances  liberators  of  life,  those  earlier  artists  were
tamers of the  will, transformers of animals, creators of men,  and  in general sculptors and  remodellers of life:  whereas the fame of those of today may lie in unharnessing,  unfettering,  destroying. - The older Greeks demanded of the poet that he should be a teacher of adults: but how embarrassed a poet would be now if this was demanded of him - he who was no good teacher of himself and thus himself failed to become  a fine poem,  a
fair statue,  but at best as it were the modest, attractive ruins of a temple,
though  at  the  same  time  a  cave  of  desires,  overgrown  with  flowers,
thistles  and  poisonous weeds,  and  dwelt  in  or haunted by  snakes,  reptiles,  birds  and  spiders - an  object  inspiring sad  reflections  on why  the noblest and  most precious must nowadays grow up straightway as a ruin
without any  past or future perfection.
Looking before and after. - An art such as issues forth from  Homer,  Sophocles,  Theocritus, t Calderon,  Racine,  Goethe,  as the surplus of a wise and harmonious conduct of life - this is the art we finally learn to reach out for
when  we  ourselves  have  grown  wiser  and  more  harmonious:  not  that
barbaric if enthralling  spluttering  out  of hot  and motley  things  from a
chaotic, unruly soul which as youths we in earlier years understood to be
art. It goes without saying, however,  that during certain periods of life an
art  of  high  tension,  excitation,  repugnance  for  the  regulated,  monotonous,  simple  and  logical,  is a  necessary  requirement that artists have to meet if the soul is during this period not to discharge itself in other directions  through mischief and  improprieties of all kinds.  Thus  youth,  as it usually  is,  full,  fermenting,  plagued by  nothing more than by boredom,
needs  this  art  of  thrilling  disorder - women  who  lack  a  soul-fulfilling
•  Ultramontane martyrdom:  ultramontanism was a term used to refer to the Catholic move·
ments that  upheld  papal  supremacy,  in France,  Germany and  the Netherlands in the seven·
teenth and  eighteenth  centuries
t  Theocritus (c.  310 to 250 BC): Greek poet.
A S S O R T E D  O P I N I O N S  A N D  M A X I M S
occupation also need it. Their longing for a contentment that knows no
change, a happiness without delirium and stupefaction, will be kindled
all the more vehemently.
Against the art of works of art. - Art is above and before all supposed to beauti-
fy life,  thus make  us  ourselves  endurable,  if possible  pleasing  to  others:
with this task in view it restrains us and keeps us within bounds, creates
social  forms,  imposes on the  unmannerly rules of decency,  cleanliness,
politeness, of speaking and staying silent at the proper time. Then, art is
supposed  to conceal or reinterpret everything ugly, those painful,  dreadful,  disgusting things which,  all efforts  notwithstanding,  in accord with the origin of human nature again and again insist on breaking forth: it is
supposed to do so especially in regard to the passions and psychical fears
and torments, and in the case of what is ineluctably or invincibly ugly to
let  the  meaning  of  the  thing  shine  through.  After  this  great,  indeed
immense task of art,  what is usually termed art,  that of the work of art, is
merely an appendage.  A man who feels within himself an excess of such
beautifying,  concealing and reinterpreting powers will in the end seek to
discharge this excess in works of art as well; so,  under the right circumstances, will an entire people. - Now, however, we usually start with art where we should end with it, cling hold of it by its tail and believe that the
art of the work of art is  true art out of which life  is to be improved and
transformed - fools that we are! If we begin the meal with the dessert and
cram  ourselves  with  sweet  things,  is  it  any  wonder  if  we  spoil  our
stomach, and even our appetite, for the good, strengthening, nourishing
meals to which art invites us!
Endurance of art.  - Why,  at bottom,  is  it  that an art  of works of art  con-
tinues to endure? It is because most of those who possess leisure - and it
is  only for  them  that  such  an  art  exists - believe  that without  music,
attendance at  the  theatre  and  picture-galleries,  without  reading novels
and  poems,  they  will  never  get  through  the  day.  Supposing one  were
able  to  deprive  them  of  these  satisfactions,  they  would  either  cease  to
strive  after  leisure  so  eagerly  and  the  envy-inspiring  sight  of  the  rich
would become rarer - a great gain for the stability of society; or, still possessing leisure,  they could learn how to reflect - which can be learned and also unlearned - upon their work,  for example,  their relationships, upon
pleasures they might bestow: in both cases all the world, the artists alone
excepted, would derive advantage from it. - There are many fine and sensible readers who at this point would certainly raise a valid objection. For the sake of the dull and malevolent, however, it should for once be said
that, here as so often in this book, the author is alive to this objection,  and
that there is much in it that does not appear on the printed page.
The  mouthpiece  of  the  gods.
The  poet  expresses  the  general  higher
-
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
opinions possessed by a people,  he is their flute and mouthpiece - but,
by virtue of metric and all the other methods of art, he expresses them in
such a way that the people receive them as something quite new and marvellous and  believe in all  seriousness that the  poet is the  mouthpiece  of the  gods.  Indeed,  in  the  clouds  of  creation  the  poet  himself  forgets
whence  he  has  acquired  all  his  spiritual  wisdom  - from  his  father  and
mother,  from  teachers  and  books  of  all  kinds,  from  the  street  and
especially from the priests;  he is deceived by  his own  art and,  in naive
ages, really does believe that a god is speaking through him, that he is creating in a  state  of religious  illumination - whereas  he  is  repeating  only what he has learned, popular wisdom mixed up with popular folly. Thus,
insofar as the poet really is vox populi he counts as vox dei. *
What all art wants to do but cannot. - The hardest and ultimate task of the
artist is the representation of the  unchanging,  of  that which reposes  in
itself, the exalted and  simple; that is why the highest forms of moral perfection are rejected by the weaker artists themselves as inartistic sketches, because the sight of this fruit is all too painful to their ambition: it glitters
down  upon  these  artists  from  the highest branches  of art,  but they lack
the ladder,  the courage and the skill to dare to venture so high.  In itself,
a  Phidiast  as poet  is  perfectly  possible,  but,  considering  what  modern
capacities  are like,  almost  only in the sense that with God all things are
possible.  The  desire  even  for a  poetic  Claude  Lorrain is,  indeed,  at the
present time a piece of immodesty, however much the heart may crave it.
- To the representation of the ultimate man, that is to say the simplest and at
the same time the most whole, no artist has so far been equal; perhaps, however, in the ideal of Athene the Greeks cast their eyes farther than any other men have done hitherto.
Art and  recuperation.  - The  retrogressive  movements  in  history,  the  socalled periods of recuperation, which seek to restore life to a spiritual and social  condition preceding them  and  do actually seem  to  achieve  a brief
awakening of the dead, possess the charm of an agreeable recollection,  a
yearning desire for what has almost been lost,  a hurried embracing of a
happiness  that  lasts  for  but a  few  minutes.  On  account of this  strange
deepening of mood it is in precisely such fleeting, almost dreamlike ages
that art and  poetry find a natural soil: just as the rarest and most delicate
plants  flourish  on  steep  mountainsides.  - Thus  many  a  fine  artist  is
driven  unawares  to a recuperative  disposition  in politics and society for
which he prepares for himself on his own account a quiet corner and little
garden: where he then assembles around him the human remains of this
historical era he finds so comfortable and lets his lyre resound before no
one but the dead,  the half-dead and the weary unto death,  perhaps with
the outcome referred to above of a brief awakening of the dead.
•  vox populi: voice of the people; vox dei: voice of God
t  Phidias (fifth century BC): Greek sculptor.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
Our age's good fortune. - There  are  two  respects in  which our age  may  be
called fortunate. With respect to the past we have enjoyment of all the cultures there  have ever been and  of  their  productions,  and  nourish ourselves with the noblest blood of every age; we still stand sufficiently close to the magical forces of the power out of whose womb they were born to
be able to subject ourselves to them in passing with joy and awe: whereas
earlier cultures were capable of enjoying only themselves, with no view
of what lay outside - it was as though they lay beneath a vaulted dome, of
greater  or  less  extent,  which,  though  light  streamed  down  upon  them
from it, was itself impenetrable to their gaze.  In respect to the future there
opens out before us, for the first time in history, the tremendous far-flung
prospect  of  human-ecumenical  goals  embracing  the  entire  inhabited
earth. At the same time we feel conscious of possessing the strength to be
allowed  without  presumption  to  take  this  new  task  in  hand  ourselves
without requiring supernatural  assistance;  indeed,  let  our  undertaking
eventuate as it may, even if we have overestimated our strength, there is
in any case no one to whom we owe a reckoning except ourselves: henceforth mankind  can  do with itself whatever  it wishes. - There  are,  to be sure,  singular human bees who know how to extract from the flower-cup
of all things only what is bitterest and most vexatious; - and all things do
in  fact contain  in  them  something  of  this  non-honey.  Let  these  feel  as
they must about the good fortune of our age just described and carry on
with the construction of their beehive of discontent.
A vision. - Lectures and hours of meditation for adults, for the mature and
maturest, and these daily, without compulsion but attended by everyone
as a command of custom:  the churches as the worthiest venues for them
because richest in memories:  every  day  as  it were a  festival of attained
and attainable dignity of human reason: a new and fuller efflorescence of
the ideal of the teacher, in which the priest, the artist and the physician,
the  man  of  knowledge  and  the  man  of  wisdom,  are  fused  with  one
another, with a resultant fusion of their separate virtues into a single total
virtue  which  would  also  be  expressed  in  their  teaching  itself,  in  their
delivery  and  their  methods  - this  is  my  vision:  it  returns  to  me  again
and  again,  and  I  firmly  believe  that  it  lifts  a  corner  of  the  veil  of  the
future.
Educational contortion.  The reason for the extraordinary precariousness
-
of all  institutions  of instruction,  which gives every adult the feeling his
only  educator has  been chance - for  the  fact that educational methods
and objectives are like a weather-vane - is that today the oldest and the
newest cultural powers want, as in a noisy popular assembly, to be heard
rather  than understood and  through their shrill cries to demonstrate at
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
any price that they still exist or already exist. In the midst of this senseless
hubbub the poor teachers and educators have at first been deafened, then
grown silent and  finally apathetic,  and  they now bear all patiently  and
merely pass it on to their pupils. They themselves are not educated: how
should  they  be  able  to  educate?  They  themselves  are  not  trees  grown
straight,  strong  and full of sap:  whoever wants  to attach himself to them
will  have to bend and  twist himself, and will in the end appear contorted
and deformed.
Philosophers and artists of our time. - Dissoluteness and indifference, burning  desires,  cooling  of the  heart  - this  repulsive  juxtaposition  is  to  be found in the higher society of Europe of the present day.  The artist believes he has done a great deal if through his art he has for once set the heart aflame beside these burning desires: and likewise the philosopher if,
given  the coolness of the  heart he has in common  with his age,  he succeeds through his world-denying judgements in cooling the  heat of the desires  in himself and in this society.
18)
Do not be a warrior of culture if you do not need to be. - At long last we learn
that of which our ignorance in our youth caused us  so much harm: that
we  have  first  to  do  what  is  excellent,  then  seek out  what  is  excellent,
wherever and under whatever name it is to be found, but avoid all that is
bad and mediocre without combatting it, and that to doubt the goodness of
a  thing  - as  can  easily  happen  to  a  more  practised  taste - may  already
count as an argument against it and a reason for ignoring it completely:
though  this  must be at the risk of sometimes  blundering and confusing
goodness accessible only with difficulty with the bad and imperfect. Only
he who can do nothing better should assault the basenesses of the world
as a warrior of culture.  But the teachers and promoters of culture destroy
themselves  when  they  desire  to  go  about  in  arms  and  through  precautions,  night  watches  and  evil  dreams  transform  the  tranquillity  of their house and  calling into an  uncanny lack of tranquillity.
How natural history should be narrated. - Natural history,  as the history of
the  war  of  the  spiritual-moral  forces  against  fear,  imaginings,  inertia,
superstition,  folly,  and  their victory over them,  ought to be  narrated  in
such  a  way  that  everyone  who  hears  it  is  irresistibly  inspired  to  strive
after  spiritual  and bodily health and vigour,  to the glad  feeling of being
the heir and continuator of mankind, and to an ever nobler need for practical  activity.  Up to  now  it  has  not  yet  discovered  its  proper  language, because artists inventive in language and eloquence - for these are what
is needed - refuse to relinquish an obstinate mistrust of it and above all
refuse to learn from it.  Nonetheless,  it must be allowed that the English
have taken admirable steps in the direction of that ideal with their natural
science textbooks for the lower strata of the people: the reason is that they
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
are written by  their most distinguished  scholars - whole,  complete and
fulfilling natures - and not, as is the case with us, by mediocrities.
Genius  of humanity.
If  genius  consists,  according  to  Schopenhauer's
-
observation,  in the connected and lively recollection of experience,  then
in  the  striving  for  knowledge  of the  entire  historical  past - which  ever
more mightily distinguishes the  modern age from all others and has for
the  first  time  demolished  the  ancient  walls  between  nature  and  spirit,
man and animal,  morality and the physical world - it may be possible to
recognize a striving for the genius of humanity as a whole.  History perfect and complete would be cosmic self-consciousness.
Cult of culture. - To great spirits there has been joined the repellent all-toohuman  aspects  of their  nature,  their  blindnesses,  deformities,  extravagances,  so  that  their  mighty  influence,  that  can  easily  grow  all  too mighty,  shall  be  kept  within  bounds  by  the  mistrust  these  qualities
inspire. For the system of all that which humanity has need of for its continued existence is so comprehensive, and lays claim to so many and such varying forces,  that humanity as a whole would have to pay heavily for
any onesided preference,  whether it be science or the  state or art or trade,
to which these individuals would entice it. It has always been the greatest
fatality for culture when men have been worshipped:  in which sense one
may even  feel in accord with  the  Mosaic  law  which forbids us  to  have
other gods beside God. - Next to the cult of the genius and his force tnere
must always be placed,  as its complement and palliative,  the cult of culture: which knows how to accord to  the material,  humble, base,  misunderstood,  weak,  imperfect,  onesided,  incomplete,  untrue,  merely apparent, indeed to the evil and dreadful, a proper degree of understanding and the admission that all this is necessary; for the harmonious endurance of all that is human, attained through astonishing labours and lucky accidents and as much the work of ants and cyclops as of genius,  must
not be lost to us again: how, then, could we dispense with the common,
deep  and  often  uncanny  groundbass  without  which  melody  cannot be
melody?
Joy in  the ancient world. - The men  of the  world  of antiquity  knew better
how  to  rejoice:  we how to suffer less; the  former employed all their abundance  of ingenuity  and  capacity to  reflect  for  the  continual  creation  of new  occasions  for  happiness  and  celebration:  whereas  we  employ  our
minds rather towards  the  amelioration  of suffering and  the  removal  of
sources of pain. In regard to an existence of suffering the ancients sought
forgetfulness  or  some  way  or  other  of  converting  their  feelings  into
pleasurable ones: so that in this matter they sought palliatives, while we
attack the cause of suffering and on the whole prefer prophylactic measures.  - Perhaps  we  are  only  constructing  the  foundations  upon  which men of the future will again erect the temple of joy.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
The muses as liars. - 'We are capable of telling many lies' - thus the muses
once  sang when  they revealed  themselves  to Hesiod.  - Many vital discoveries can be made if we for once apprehend the artist as a deceiver.
How  paradoxical  Homer  can  be.  - Is  there  anything  more  audacious,
uncanny  or  unbelievable  shining  down  on  the  destiny  of  man  like  a
winter sun  than that idea we find in Homer:
then did the gods make resolve and ordain unto men
destruction, that in after times too there might be matter for song.
Thus  we suffer and  perish  so  that  the poets  shall  not lack material - and
this  according to the  decree of the gods of Homer, who seem to be very
much  concerned  about  the  pleasures  of  coming  generations  but  very
indifferent to us,  the  men  of the present. - That  such  ideas  should  ever
have entered the  head  of a Greek!
Subsequent justification of existence. - Many ideas have entered the world as
errors  and  fantasies  but  have  become  truths,  because  men  have  afterwards  foisted upon them a substratum of reality.
Need for pro and contra. - Whoever has not grasped that every great man
has not only to be supported  but,  for the good of the general wellbeing,
also opposed, is certainly still a great child - or himself a great man.
Injustice on the part of genius.  Genius  is most unjust towards  geniuses,
-
when they happen to be its contemporaries: in the first place it believes it
has no need of them and thus regards them as superfluous - for it is what
it is without them - then their influence clashes with the effect of its electric current: on which account it even calls them harmful.
The worst fate that can befall a prophet. - He laboured for twenty years at persuading his contemporaries to believe in him - finally he succeeded; but in the meantime  his adversaries  had also succeeded:  he  no  longer believed in himself.
Three  thinkers equal a spider.  - In every philosophical sect three  thinkers
follow one after the other in the following way:  the first produces out of
himself the seed and sap, the second draws it out into threads and spins
an artificial web, the third lurks in this web for victims who get caught in
it - and tries to live off philosophy.
Trafficking with authors.  To seize an author by the nose is as bad man-
-
A S S O RT E D  O P I N I O N S  A N D   M A X I M S
nered as to take him by the horns - and every author has his horns.
Two-horse team. - Unclear  thinking  and  sentimental  emotionalism  are as
frequently united with a ruthless will to self-assertion,  to ascendancy at
all cost,  as  is a warm benevolence  and  desire  to help with the drive to
dean and dear thinking,  to moderation and restraint of feeling.
That which  unites  and  that which divides.  - Does  that which  unites  men -
their  understanding  of  what  constitutes  their  common  advantage  and
disadvantage - not lie in the head,  and  that which  divides  them - their
blind groping and selectivity in love and hatred,  their preference for one
at the expense of all others and  the contempt for the general wellbeing
that arises from it - not lie in the heart?
Marksmen and thinkers. - There are curious marksmen who,  though they
miss the target, depart from the range complacently proud of the fact that
their bullet did at any rate fly a great distance (well beyond the target in
any event), or that, though they did not hit the target, they did at any rate
hit something.  And there are thinkers like this.
From two sides. - We are hostile to an intellectual tendency and movement
if we are superior to it and disapprove of its objectives, or if its objectives
are too remote and we cannot understand them,  that is to say when they
are superior to  us.  Thus  a  party can be  opposed from two  sides,  from
above and below; and it is no rare  thing for both opponents to form an
alliance  grounded  in  their  common  hatred  that  is  more  repulsive  than
anything they join in hating.
Originality. - Not that a man sees something new as the first one to do so,
but that he sees something old, familiar,  seen but overlooked by everyone, as though it were new, is what distinguishes true originality.  The first discoverer  is  usually  that  quite  commonplace  and  mindless  fantasist -
chance.
Error of philosophers. - The philosopher believes that the value of his philosophy  lies  in  the  whole,  in  the  building:  posterity  discovers  it in  the bricks with which he built and which are then often used again for better
building: in the fact, that is to say, that that building can be destroyed and
nonetheless possess value as material.
Witticism. - A witticism is an epigram on the death of a feeling.
The moment before the solution.  - In  the realm of science it happens every
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
hour that someone stands immediately before the solution of a problem
convinced  that all his  efforts  have been in vain - like one untying a bow
who, at just the moment before it is about to come apart, hesitates: for it is
precisely then  that it looks most like a knot.
Going among fanatics. - The thoughtful man who is sure of his reason can
profit by going among fantasists for a decade and, within this torrid zone,
surrendering himself to a modest degree of folly. By doing so he has gone
a  good  stretch  of  the  way  towards  that  cosmopolitanism  of  the  spirit
which can say  without  presumption:  'nothing of the  spirit is any longer
alien to me'.
Keen air. - The finest and healthiest element in science is, as in the mountains,  the keen air that wafts through it. - The spiritually delicate (such as the artists) avoid and slander science on account of this air.
2o6
Why scholars are nobler than artists.  Science  requires nobler natures than
-
does  poetry:  they have to be  simpler,  less  ambitious,  more  abstemious,
quieter,  less  concerned  with  posthumous  fame,  and  able  to lose  themselves in contemplation of things few would consider worthy of such a sacrifice  of  the  personality.  In  addition  they  are  conscious  of  another
deprivation:  the  nature  of their occupation,  its constant demand for the
greatest sobriety,  enfeebles their will,  the  fire  is  not maintained at such
heat as it is in the  hearth of the poetic nature: and that is why they often
lose  the  best  of their  energy  and  efflorescence  earlier  in life than do  the
latter - and,  as  aforesaid,  they  know  of  this  danger.  Under all  circumstances they seem less  gifted because they glitter  less,  and will be accounted less than they are.
To what extent piety obscures. - In later centuries,  the great man is made a
present of all the great qualities and virtues of his own century - and thus
all that is best is continually obscured by  piety,  which  sees it as a  sacred
image to which votive offerings are brought and before which they are set
up, until in the end it is completely covered and concealed by them and is
henceforth an object of faith rather than of observation.
Standing on one's head. - When we set truth on its head we usually fail to
notice that  our head too is not standing where it ought  to stand.
Origin  and  utility of fashion.  The  obvious  self-contentment  of  the  indi
-
vidual with his form excites imitation and gradually  produces  the form of
the many,  that is to say fashion:  the many want through fashion to attain
to precisely that pleasing self-contentment with one's form and they do
attain it. - If one considers how much reason every person has for anxiety
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
and  timid  self-concealment,  and  how  three-quarters  of his  energy  and
goodwill can be paralysed and made unfruitful by it, one has to be very
grateful to fashion, insofar as it sets that three-quarters free and communicates self-confidence and mutual cheerful agreeableness to those who know they are all bound by its  law.  Even foolish laws bestow freedom
and quietness of heart provided many have agreed to be subject to them.
Tongue-loosener. - The value of many books and people lies solely in their
ability  to  constrain  everyone  to  express  what  is  most  concealed  and
deeply buried within them:  they are tongue-looseners and  crowbars for
even  the  most  clenched  teeth.  Many  events  and  ill-deeds,  too,  which
seem to exist merely to be  the curse of mankind,  possess a similar value
and utility.
21 1
Free-ranging spirits. - Which of us would dare to call himself a free spirit if
he would not wish to pay homage in his own way to those men to whom
this name has been applied as an insult by taking on to his own shoulders
some  of  this  burden  of  public  disapprobation  and  revilement?  What,
however, we may call ourselves in all seriousness (and without being in
any way defiant) is 'free-ranging spirits', because we feel the tug towards
freedom  as  the  strongest  drive  of  our  spirit  and,  in  antithesis  to  the
fettered and firm-rooted intellects,  see our ideal almost in a spiritual nomadism - to employ a modest and almost contemptuous expression.
Yes, the favour of the muses! - What Homer says of it is so true and so terrible  it pierces  us  through:  'the muse loved  him dearly and gave  to  him good  and  evil;  for  she  took from him  his eyes and bestowed  upon  him
sweet song'.  - This is a text without end for the thinker:  she gives good
and evil,  that is her way of loving dearly! And everyone will interpret for
himself why it is we thinkers and poets have to give our eyes in exchange.
Against  the cultivation  of  music.  - The  artistic  education  of the eye from
childhood  on through  drawing and  painting,  and the sketching of landscapes, people and events, brings with it in later life the invaluable attendant  benefit  of  rendering  the  eye  sharp,  tranquil  and persevering  in  the observation of men and situations.  No similar attendant advantage is to
be  derived  from  the  artistic  cultivation  of  the  ear:  for  which  reason
schools would in general do well to give the art of the eye preference over
that of the ear.
The  discoverers  of  trivialities.  - Subtle  spirits  to  whom  nothing could  be
more alien than a  triviality  often  discover one after all  kinds  of roving
about and mountain-climbing, and take great pleasure in it - much to the
amazement of the non-subtle.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
Morality of the learned. - Regular and rapid progress in the sciences is possible only when the individual is not obliged to be too mistrustful in the testing of every account and  assertion made by others in domains in which he is a relative stranger: the condition for this, however, is that in his own
field  everyone  must  have  rivals  who  are  extremely  mistrustful  and  are
accustomed to observe him very closely.  It is out of this juxtaposition of
'not  too mistrustful'  and  'extremely mistrustful'  that the  integrity  of the
republic of the learned originates.
Ground of unfruitfulness. - There are highly gifted spirits who are always
unfruitful  simply  because,  from a  weakness  in their  temperament,  they
are too impatient to wait out the term of their pregnancy.
Upside-down world of tears. - The manifold discomforts imposed upon men
by  the  claims  of  higher  culture  at  last  distort  nature  so  far  that  they
usually bear themselves stiffly and stoically and have tears only for rare
attacks  of good  fortune,  so  that  many,  indeed,  are  constrained  to weep
merely because they have ceased to feel pain: - only when they are happy
do their hearts beat again.
The Greeks as interpreters. - When we speak of the Greeks we involuntarily
speak of today and  yesterday:  their familiar history is a polished mirror
that always radiates something that is not in the mirror itself. We employ
our  freedom  to  speak of them so as to be  allowed  to  remain  silent about
others - so  that  the  latter  may  now  say  something into  the  thoughtful
.reader's ear. Thus the Greeks make it easier for modern man to communicate much that is delicate and hard to communicate.
On  the acquired character of the Greeks.  - The  celebrated  clarity,  transparency,  simplicity and orderliness of the Greeks, the crystalline naturalness and at the same time crystalline artisticality of their works, can easily mislead us into believing that all this was simply handed to the Greeks: that, for example, they were incapable of not writing well, as Lichtenberg* did
in fact say. But nothing could be more untenable or hasty. The history of
prose  from Gorgiast to Demosthenes  shows  a labouring and  struggling
to emerge out of obscurity,  floridity and  tastelessness  into the light that
recalls the efforts  of heroes breaking a first pathway through forest and
swamp.  The dialogue of tragedy is the actual achievement of the dramatists,  on account of its uncommon definiteness and clarity against a background  of a  people  who  revelled  in  symbolism  and  allusions  and  who
•  Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1742--<)4): German writer and aphorist.
t  Gorgias (fl. 430 BC): Greek philosopher and teacher of rhetoric.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
were educated away from this especially by the great choral lyrics of the
tragedy:  just  as  it  is  the  achievement  of  Homer  to  have  liberated  the
Greeks from Asiatic pomp, vagueness and obscurity and to have attained
to architectural clarity on a large scale and a  small.  It was,  moreover, by
no  means  accounted  easy  to  say  something  with  true  distinctness  and
lucidity;  how else would  there have been such great admiration for the
epigram  of Simonides,  which presents itself  so  plainly,  without  gilded
figures or witty arabesques but saying what it has to say clearly, with the
reposefulness  of  the  sunlight,  not  the  snatching at effects of a  flash  of
lightning.  It  is  because  striving towards  the  light  out  of  an  as  it  were
inborn  twilight  characterizes  the  Greeks  that  a  cry  of  rejoicing  goes
through the people when they hear a laconic maxim, the language of the
elegy, the sayings of the Seven Wise Men. That is why the promulgation
of laws in verse, which we find offensive, was so well loved: it represented the actual Apollonian task for the Hellenic spirit of triumphing over the  perils  of  metre,  over  the  darkness  and  obscurity  that  otherwise
characterizes  the  poetic.  Simplicity,  suppleness,  sobriety  were  extorted
from the people, they were not inherent in them - the danger of a relapse
into the Asiatic hovered over the Greeks at all times, and now and then
they were in fact as though inundated by a stream of mysticism and elemental  savagery  and  darkness.  We  see  them  sink,  we  see  Europe  as  it were  flushed away and drowned - for Europe was very small in those
days - but always they come to  the  surface again,  excellent  swimmers
and divers that they are,  the nation of Odysseus.
The real paganism. - Perhaps nothing astonishes the observer of the Greek
world  more  than  when  he  discovers  that  from  time  to  time  the  Greeks
made as it were a festival of all their passions and evil natural inclinations
and 'even  instituted  a  kind  of official  order  of  proceedings  in  the  celebration  of  what  was  all-too-human  in  them:  this  constitutes  the  real paganism of their world,  uncomprehended by and incomprehensible  to
Christianity,  which  has  always  despised  and  combatted  it  with  the
greatest severity.  - They took this all-too-human  to be inescapable and,
instead of reviling it, preferred  to accord it a kind of right of the second
rank  through  regulating  it  within  the  usages  of  society  and  religion:
indeed,  everything  in  man  possessing  power  they  called  divine  and
inscribed it on the walls of their Heaven. They do not repudiate the natural drive that finds expression in the evil qualities but regulate it and, as soon as they have discovered sufficient prescriptive measures to provide
these wild waters with  the least harmful  means  of channeling  and outflow,  confine them to definite cults and days.  This is the root of all the moral  free-mindedness  of antiquity.  One granted  to  the  evil  and  suspicious, to the animal and backward, likewise to the barbarian,  the pre
Greek and  Asiatic,  that still lived on in the  foundations  of the Hellenic
nature, a moderate discharge, and did not strive after their total annihilation.  The  entire  system  of such  procedures was comprehended in the
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
state,  which  was  constituted  to  accommodate,  not  individual  people
or  castes,  but  the  ordinary  qualities  of  mankind.  In  its  construction
the  Greeks  demonstrated  that  wonderful  sense  for  the  factual  and
typical that later qualified them to become natural scientists,  historians,
geographers and  philosophers.  The constitution  of the  state and of the
state  religion  was  determined,  not  by  a  circumscribed  priestly  or
caste-dominated moral code,  but by the most comprehensive regard for
all  human  actuality.  Where  did  the  Greeks  acquire  this  freedom,  this
-
sense for the actual? Perhaps from Homer and the poets before him; for
it  is  precisely  the  poets,  whose  natures  are  not  commonly  the  most
sagacious or judicious, who possess by way of compensation a joy in the
actual and active of every kind and have no desire to deny even evil altogether: they are satisfied if it keeps itself within bounds and refrains from wholesale  slaughter  or  inner  subversion - that  is  to  say,  they  think  in
much  the  same  way as  the  creators of the  Greek states,  and  were  their
instructors and pathfinders.
Exceptions among the Greeks. - In Greece the profound,  thorough,  serious
spirits  were  the  exceptions:  the  instinct  of  the  people  was  inclined,
rather,  to  regard  seriousness  and  thoroughness as a  kind  of distortion.
Not to create forms but to borrow them from abroad and transform them
into the fairest appearance of beauty - that is Greek: imitation, not for use
but for the end of artistic deception, the repeated defeating of an imposed
seriousness,  ordering, beautifying, making shallow and superficial - that
is the course they  pursued,  from Homer to the sophists of the third and
fourth centuries of the Christian era,  who are wholly surface, pompous
phrases,  animated  gestures,  and  address  themselves  to  hollowed-out
souls  thirsting for mere  noise,  effect and appearance.  - And now  try  to
assess the  greatness of those exceptional Greeks who  created science!  He
who tells of them,  tells the most heroic story in the history of the human
spirit!
The simple comes neither first nor last in time. - In the history of the religious
conceptions,  much  false evolution and  graduality  has been  invented  in
the  case  of  things  which  in  truth  grew  up,  not  out  of  and  after  one
another,  but side by  side and  separately;  the  simple,  especially,  is  still
much  too much  reputed  to be the oldest and primary.  Not a little that is
human  originates  through  subtraction  and  division,  not through duplication,  addition,  growing together.  - One still believes, for example, in a gradual evolution of representations of gods from clumsy stones and blocks
of  wood  up to complete humanization:  and  yet  the fact of the  matter  is
that,  so long as  the  divinity was  introduced  into  trees,  pieces  of wood,
stones,  animals, and felt to reside there, one shrank from a humanization
of their form as from an act of godlessness. It required the poets, existing
outside  the religious cult and  the spell of religious awe,  to accustom the
imagination  of men to acceding to  such a  thing:  overweighed again by
A S SO R T E D  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
more  pious  moods and  moments,  however,  this  liberating influence  of
the  poets  again  withdrew  and  the  sacred  remained,  as  before,  in  the
realm of the monstrous,  uncanny and quite specifically non-human.  But
even  much  of  that  which  the  imagination  dares  to  construct  for  itself
would,  translated into outward,  bodily representation,  nonetheless  produce a painful effect: the inward eye is very much bolder and less bashful than the  outward  (which  is why it is difficult, and in part impossible,  to
convert epic material into dramatic). The religious imagination for a long
time refuses absolutely to believe in the identity of the god and an image:
the image is supposed to be the visible evidence that the numen of the divinity is, in some mysterious, not fully comprehensible way, active in this place and bound to it. The oldest image of the god is supposed to harbour
and at  the  same  time conceal  the  god  - to  intimate  his  presence  but  not
expose it to view.  No Greek ever truly beheld his Apollo as a wooden obelisk,  his Eros as a lump of stone; they were symbols whose purpose was precisely  to  excite  fear  of  beholding  him.  The  same  applies  to  those
wooden idols furnished with paltry carvings of individual  limbs,  sometimes an excess of them:  such as a Spartan Apollo with four hands and four ears.  In the incompleteness, allusiveness or overladenness of these
figures  there  lies  a  dreadful  holiness  which  is  supposed  to fend off any
association of them with anything human. It is not at an embryonic stage
of art at  which  such  things  are  fashioned:  as  though  in  the  ages  when
such figures were revered  men were incapable of speaking more clearly,
representing more  accurately.  What was  the  case,  rather,  was  that one
thing was specifically avoided: direct statement. As the cella contains the
holy  of  holies,  the  actual  numen  of  the  divinity,  and  conceals  it  in
mysterious  semi-darkness,  but does not wholly conceal it; as the peripteral
temple in  turn contains  the cella  and  as though with a  canopy and  veil
shelters it from prying eyes, but does not wholly shelter it: so the image is the
divinity and at the same time the divinity's place of concealment. - Only
when,  in the secular world of competition  outside  the religious cult,  joy
in  the  victory  in the contest had risen so high  that the waves here  produced flooded over into the lake  of the religious  sensations;  only when the statue of the victor was set up in the courts of the temples and the eye
and  the  soul  of  the  pious  frequenter  of  the  temple  had,  willingly  or
unwillingly, to accustom itself to this inescapable sight of human strength
and beauty,  so that,  standing  thus close to one another,  spatially and in
the  soul,  reverence  for  man  and  reverence  for  god  came  to  blend
together: only then was the fear of an actual  humanization  of the  divine
image also overcome and the great arena for plastic art in the grand style
opened  up:  yet still with  the restriction  that wherever worship was to be
conducted  the  ancient  forms  and  ugliness  were  preserved  and  scrupulously  imitated.  But  the  sanctifying  and  bestowing  Hellene  might  now pursue to his heart's content his desire to let god become man.
Whither we have to travel.  - Direct  self-observation is  not  nearly sufficient
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
for  us to know  ourselves:  we require  history,  for the  past continues  to
flow  within  us  in a  hundred  waves;  we ourselves are,  indeed,  nothing
but that which at every moment we experience of this continued flowing.
It may even be  said  that here  too,  when  we  desire to descend into the
river  of  what  seems  to be  our own  most  intimate  and  personal  being,
there applies the dictum of Heraclitus: we cannot step into the same river
twice. - This is,  to be  sure,  a piece of wisdom  that has gradually grown
stale, but it has nonetheless remained as true and valid as it ever was: just
as has this other piece of wisdom, that to understand history we have to
go in quest of the living remnants of historical epochs - we have to travel,
as  the father of history, Herodotus, travelled, to other nations - for these
are only earlier stages of culture grown firm upon which we can take a stand
- to  the  so-called  savage  and  semi-savage  peoples,  and  especially  to
where man has taken off the garb of Europe or has not yet put it on.  But
there exists a subtler art and object of travel which does not always require
us to move from place to place or to traverse thousands of miles. The last
three centuries very probably still continue to live on, in all their cultural
colours  and cultural refractions, close beside us: they want only to be discovered.  In  many  families,  indeed  in  individual  men,  the  strata  still  lie neatly  and  clearly  one  on  top  of  the  other:  elsewhere  there  are  dislocations and faults which make understanding more difficult. A venerable specimen of very much  older sensibility could  certainly have been more
easily preserved in remoter regions, in less  travelled mountain valleys,  in
more  self-enclosed  communities:  while  it  is  improbable  that  such  discoveries would be made in, for example, Berlin, where people come into the world washed and scalded clean.  He who,  after long practice in this
art of travel,  has become  a  hundred-eyed  Argos,  will  in the end be  attended  everywhere by  his Io* - I mean his ego - and will rediscover the adventurous  travels  of this  ego  in  process  of becoming  and  transformation in Egypt and Greece,  Byzantium and Rome,  France and Germany, in the age of the nomadic or of the settled nations, in the Renaissance and
the Reformation,  at home and abroad,  indeed in the sea,  the forests,  in
the plants and in the mountains. - Thus self-knowledge will become universal knowledge with regard to all that is past: just as, merely to allude to  another  chain  of  reflections,  self-determination  and  self-education
could,  in the freest and most far-sighted spirits,  one day become universal determination with regard to all future humanity.
Balm  and  poison. - This fact  can  never  be  sufficiently pondered:  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  antiquity  grown  old,  its  presupposition  is  degenerated ancient cultures; on these it could and can act as a balm. In ages in  which  ears and  eyes are 'filled  with  mud',  so that they are no longer
capable  of  hearing  the  voice  of  reason  and  philosophy,  or  of  seeing
wisdom in bodily form,  whether it bear the name of Epictetus or of Epi-
•  /o: in Greek mythology,  daughter of King (nachos and lover of Zeus turned into a cow by
Hera  and given to  the  giant Argos.
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S  A N D   M A X I M S
curus: in such  ages  the cross  of  martyrdom  and the  'trumpet of the  last
judgement' may perhaps still move the peoples to live a decent life.  If one
thinks of the Rome of Juvenal,,. that poison-toad with the eyes of Venus,
one learns what it means to confront the 'world' with a Cross, one comes
to  respect  the quiet Christian community and is  grateful  that it  overran
the  Graeco-Roman  world.  When  most people were born as though with
the souls of slaves and  the sensuality of old men,  what a blessing it must
have  been  to  encounter  beings  who  were  more  soul  than  body  and
seemed  to  be  an  actualisation  of  the Greek conception  of the  shades of
Hades:  modest,  elusive,  benevolent  figures  living  in  expectation  of  a
'better life'  and thereby become  so  undemanding,  so  silently contemptuous,  so proudly patient!  - This Christianity as  the evening-bell of good antiquity,  a  bell  broken  and  weary  yet  still sweet-sounding,  is a  balm  to
the ears even for him who now wanders through these centuries only as a
historian:  what  must  it  have  been  for  the  men  of these  centuries  themselves!  - On  the  other  hand,  for  youthful,  vigorous  barbarians  Christianity  is poison; to implant the teaching of sinfulness and damnation into the heroic, childish and animal soul of the ancient German,  for example,
is nothing other than  to  poison it;  a  quite tremendous chemical fermentation  and  decomposition,  a  confusion  of  feelings  and  judgements,  a rank exuberance  of every  kind  of fantasy must have been  the outcome,
and  thus  in  the  longer  run  a  fundamental  enfeeblement  of  such  barbarians.  - One  must,  to  be  sure,  ask what,  without  this  enfeeblement, there would  have been  left  to  us of Greek culture!  of the  entire  cultural
past of the human race! - for the barbarian races untouched by Christianity
were  capable  of  doing  away  with  ancient  cultures  altogether:  as,  for
example, was demonstrated with fearful clarity by the pagan conquerors
of Romanized Britain.  Christianity was obliged against its will to assist in
making the 'world' of antiquity immortal. - Here too there still remains
another counter-question and the possibility of a  counter-reckoning: if it
had not been enfeebled by the poison referred  to,  would one or other of
these vigorous peoples, the German possibly, have perhaps been capable
of gradually finding a higher culture for  themselves,  one of their own,  a
new  one? - of which,  as things are,  mankind  has not now  the remotest
conception? - Thus it is the same here as everywhere: one does not know,
to speak the language of Christianity, whether God owes more gratitude
to  the  Devil  or  the  Devil  more  gratitude  to  God  for  everything  having
turned out as it has.
Belief makes blessed and damns. - A Christian who ventured upon forbidden
pathways of thought might well ask himself one day: is it really necessary
that there should actually be a God,  and a deputizing Lamb of God, if belief
in  the existence of these beings  suffices  to produce  the same effects? Are
they  not  superfluous  beings,  even  supposing  they  do  e,qst?  For  all  the
benefits,  consolations  and  moral  improvements,  as  likewise  all  the
•  Juvenal (6o to 140 AD): Roman satirical poet
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
darkenings  and  prostrations,  bestowed  by  the  Christian  religion  upon
the human  soul proceed from this belief and not from the objects of this
belief. The case here is no different from that other celebrated case: there
were,  to  be  sure,  no  witches,  but  the  terrible  effects  of  the  belief  in
witches were the same as they would  have been if there really had been
witches. For all those occasions on which the Christian expects the direct
intervention of a God but does so in vain - because there is no God - his
religion is sufficiently inventive in reasons and excuses to pacify him: in
this it is certainly an ingenious religion. - Faith has hitherto been unable
to move any  real  mountains,  to be  sure,  even  though  I  know  not  who
asserted it could; but it is able to place mountains where there were none
before.
Tragi-comedy of Regensburg.,. - Now and then we have a frighteningly clear
view  of Fortuna's  farcical  comedy:  how  she  takes  a  few  days,  a  single
place,  the condition and opinions of one head,  and attaches to them the
rope  along  which  she intends the  coming  centuries  to  dance.  Thus  the
destiny  of  modern  Germany  lies  in  the  days  of disputation  of Regensburg: a peaceful outcome of ecclesiastical and moral contentions, without religious  wars  or  Counter-reformation,  seemed  guaranteed,  as  did  the
unity of the German nation; the conciliatory spirit of Contarinit hovered
for a moment over the theological wrangling, victorious as the representative of a more mature Italian piety upon whose pinions was reflected the  daybreak  of  spiritual  freedom.  But  Luther's bony  head,  full  of  suspicions  and  uncanny  fears,  bristled  up:  because  justification  through grace seemed to him his great discovery and motto, he did not credit this
proposition when  it was uttered by Italians: whereas,  as is well known,
the latter had discovered it much earlier and,  in profound quietness, had
propagated it throughout all Italy.  Luther saw in this  apparent accord a
trick  of the  Devil  and  hindered  the work of peace as well as  he  could:
thereby  considerably  furthering  the aims of the enemies of the Reich. -
And  now,  to get the full  flavour of the horrible  farcicality of these proceedings,  consider in addition  that  none of the propositions over which they were then  contending in Regensburg - neither that of original sin,
nor  that of redemption by proxy,  nor that of justification by faith - is in
any way  true or has anything whatever to  do with  truth,  that they are
now all recognized as undiscussable: - and yet on their account the world
was set in flames,  that is to say on account of opinions to which nothing
real corresponds; whereas contention is permitted least regarding purely
philological  questions,  for  example  the  declaration  of  the  sacramental
words of the Eucharist, because here it is possible to speak the truth.  But
where  there is  nothing,  truth too has lost its rights. - Finally,  however,
nothing  remains  to be  said  but  that  these  days  saw  the  appearance  of
•  Regensburg: theological and political conference of 1541.
t  Cardinal Gasparo Contarini (148.3-1542): a reformer in the Catholic Church who was sent
to Regensburg to achieve reconciliation with  the Lutherans; despite his celebrated diplomacy,
the conference failed.
A S S O RT E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M AX I M S
sources of energy by which the mills of the modern world were driven more
powerfully than  they  otherwise  would  have  been.  And  energy  comes
first, and only then, and a long way after, truth - isn't that true, my dear
contemporaries?
Goethe's errors. - Goethe is the great exception among the great artists in
that he  did  not live within  the  narrow-mindedness  of his actual ability,  as
though it were,  for himself and for all the world,  the essence and excellence,  the  be-ali  and  end-all  of everything.  Twice  he  thought  he  possessed something higher than he actually did possess - and in the second half  of  his  life  went  astray  in  apparently  being  overwhelmingly  convinced he  was one of the greatest scientific discoverers and illuminators.
And likewise in the first half of his life too: he wanted of himself something
higher than poetry appeared to him to be - and in this he was already in
error.  Nature  had wanted to make of him a plastic artist - that was the
glowing  and  burning  secret  that  finally  drove  him  to  Italy  so  that  he
might  truly  revel  in  this illusion and  bring  to it  every  sacrifice.  At last,
reflective  man  that he was and  one genuinely hostile to all creations of
illusion, he realized what a deceitful little demon of desire it was that had
enticed him  to believe this  was  his calling,  and how  he  had  to  liberate
himself  from  the  greatest  passion  of his will  and  say farewell  to  it.  The
agonizing  conviction  that  it  was  necessary  to  say  farewell  is  finally
exhausted  in  the  mood  of  Tasso:  over  him,  the  'intensified  Werther',*
there  lies  the  presentiment  of  something  that is worse  than  death,  as
when one says to himself: 'now all is over - after this farewell; how can I
go on living without going mad!' - It was these two fundamental errors of
his life that, in the face of a purely literary posture towards poetry such as
was at that time the only attitude towards it, bestowed on Goethe a demeanour apparently  so  independent and almost  capricious.  Except for the time in which Schiller - poor Schiller, who had no time and wasted no
time - drew him out of his abstemious coyness towards poetry, his fear of
all literary activity and professionalism,  Goethe seems like a Greek who
now and then visits a mistress but does so wondering whether she may
not be a goddess he is not quite able to name. In all his poetry there is perceptible  the  breath  of the  plastic  arts  and  of  nature:  the  lineaments  of these forms as they hovered before him - and he perhaps always believed
that  he  was  only  tracing  the  transformations  of  a  goddess  - became,
without his knowing or desiring it,  the lineaments of all the children of
his art.  Without this digression  through error he would  not have become
Goethe:  that  is  to  say,  the  only  German literary  artist  who  has  not  yet
become antiquated - because he desired to be a writer by profession just
as little as he desired to be a German by profession.
Grades of traveller.  - We can distinguish five  grades of traveller:  those of
•  Goethe's  epistolary  novel  The  Sorro�s  of  Young  Werther,  a  tale  of  disappointed  love,
appeared in 1774; Torquato Tasso (final version 178c}) represents the Italian poet drawing comfort from the company of a pure woman.
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O  H U M A N
the first and lowest grade are those who travel and, instead of seeing, are
themselves seen - they are as though blind; next come those who actually
see the world; the third experience  something as a consequence of what
they  have  seen;  the  fourth  absorb  into  themselves  what  they  have
experienced and bear it away with them; lastly there are a few men of the
highest energy  who,  after  they  have  experienced  and  absorbed  all  they
have  seen,  necessarily  have  to body it forth  again  out of  themselves  in
works and actions as soon as they have returned home. - It is like these
five species  of traveller  that all men travel through the whole journey of
life,  the  lowest  purely  passive,  the  highest  those  who  transform  into
action and exhaust everything they experience.
Climbing  higher.  - As  soon  as  we  climb  higher  than  those  who  have
hitherto admired us we appear to them to have sunk and fallen lower: for
they thought they had hitherto been standing with us (even if through us)
on the heights.
Measure and moderation. - Of two very exalted things - measure and �oderation - it is best never to speak.  Some few know their significance and power  through  inner  sacred  paths  of experience and  conversion:  they
revere in them something divine and refuse to speak of them aloud.  All
the  rest hardly listen  when they are  spoken of,  and confuse them with
bo:edom and mediocrity: except perhaps for those who did once hear a
premonitory echo from that domain but closed their ears to it.  The recollection of it now  makes  them agitated and angry.
Humanity in friendship and mastery. - 'If you are going towards the morning I shall draw towards evening' - to feel thus is a high sign of humanity in  closer  association  with  others:  in  the  absence  of  this  feeling  every
friendship,  every  discipleship  and  pupilage,  becomes  sooner  or later a
piece of hypocrisy.
The profound. - Men who think deeply appear as comedians when they
traffic with  others,  because in order to be  understood  they always have
first to simulate a  surface.
For the despisers of 'herd humanity'. - He who regards men as a herd and
flees from them as fast as he can will certainly be overtaken by them and
gored by their horns.
Capital sin against the vain. - He who gives another an opportunity to display to society his knowledge, feelings or experiences, sets himself above him and thus, in the event that the latter does not regard him as definitely
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D  M AX I M S
his superior, commits an assault on his vanity - whereas what he thought
he was doing was gratifying it.
Disappointment. - When a long and active life has, together with speeches
and writings, borne public witness to the nature of a person, association
with  him  is  usually  disappointing,  and  this  for  two  reasons:  firstly
because one expects too much from a brief period of acquaintanceship -
namely  all  that  which  only  the  thousand  occasions  of a  lifetime  could
make visible - and  then because a  person who has  won general recognition makes no effort to solicit recognition anew from every separate individual. He is too indolent - and we are too eager.
Two sources of goodness. - To treat all men with equal benevolence and to
be kind to everyone irrespective of who he is can be just as much an emanation of a profound cynicism as of a thorough philanthropy.
The wanderer in the mountains addresses himself. - There exist definite signs
to show that you have advanced forwards and climbed higher:  the view
around  you  is  more  open  and  extensive  than  it was,  the  air  that  wafts
upon you is cooler but also more gentle - you have unlearned the folly of
confusing  gentleness  with  warmth - your  step  has  grown  firmer  and
more  lively,  courage and  thoughtfulness have grown together: - for all
these  reasons  your  path  may now be  more  solitary,  and  in  any  event
more perilous,  than the one you trod before,  though certainly not to the
extent those who watch you from the misty valley below believe it to be.
Except for my neighbour. - It is obvious that my head does not stand properly on my shoulders; for it is well known that everyone else knows better than I what I should do and not do: only I, poor rogue, do not know what
I should be at.  Are we not all like statues with the wrong heads on them?
Isn't that  so,  my  dear neighbour? - But no,  you,  precisely you,  are the
exception.
Caution. - With  people  who lack respect for what is private and personal
one  should  not associate  or,  if one  does  associate  with  them,  first  pitilessly snap on them the handcuffs of propriety.
The desire to appear vain.  - To  express  only  thoughts of a  choice  and  distinguished nature when conversing with people one does not know,  or does  not  know  very  well,  to  talk  to  them  of one's  celebrated  acquaintances and interesting travels and experiences, is a sign one is not proud, or at least that one does not desire to appear so. Vanity is the proud man's
mask of politeness.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
A good friendship.  - A  good  friendship originates when  one  party  has  a
great respect for the other, more indeed than for himself, when one party
likewise  loves  the  other,  though  not  so  much  as  he  does  himself,  and
when,  finally,  one  party  knows  how  to  facilitate  the  association  by
adding to it a delicate tinge of intimacy while at the same time prudently
withholding  actual  and  genuine  intimacy and the  confounding of I and
Thou.
Friends as ghosts. - If we greatly transform ourselves, those friends of ours
who  have  not been  transformed  become  ghosts  of our  past:  their voice
comes across  to us like the voice of a shade - as though we were hearing
ourself,  only younger,  more severe,  less mature.
One eye and two glances. - Those people in whose eye there is the pleading
glance  asking  for charity and  favours are,  because of their frequent  humiliation and  consequent  feeling  of revengefulness,  also  capable  of the impudent glance.
In the blue distance. - A  child all his life - that sounds very moving, but is
only  a  judgement  from  a  distance;  seen  and  experienced  close  to,  it
always means: boyish all his life.
Advantage and disadvantage in the same misunderstanding. - When a subtle
head is struck dumb  with embarrassment the unsubtle  usually  interpret
it as silent superiority and greatly fear it:  whereas if they perceived it was
embarrassment they would feel well disposed towards him.
The wise man pretending to be a fool. - The  wise man's philanthropy sometimes  leads  him to pose as excited,  angry,  delighted, so that the coldness and reflectiveness of his true nature shall not harm those around him.
Compelling oneself to pay attention. - As soon as we notice that anyone has
to compel himself to pay attention when associating and talking with us,
we have a valid proof that he does not love us or loves us no longer.
Path to a Christian virtue. - To learn from one's enemies is the best path to
loving  them:  for it puts us in a grateful mood towards them.
Stratagem  of  the  importunate.  - The  importunate  give  gold  coins  in
exchange for our conventional coins, their object being to compel us afterwards to treat our conventions as a mistake and them as exceptions.
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
Ground of  aversion.  We  grow  hostile  to  many  an  artist  or  writer,  not
-
because  we  finally  come  to  see  he  has  deceived  us,  but  because  he
thought no subtler means were required to  ensnare  us.
In parting. - It  is  not in how  one soul  approaches  another but in  how  it
distances itself from it that I recognize their affinity and relatedness.
Silentium. - One should not talk about one's  friends:  otherwise one will
talk away the feeling of friendship.
Impoliteness.  Impoliteness is frequently  the sign of a clumsy diffidence
-
which loses its head when surprized and tries to conceal the fact through
rudeness.
Miscalculation in honesty. - What we have previously kept silent about we
sometimes first reveal to our most recent acquaintances: we foolishly believe that this demonstration of our trust is the strongest chain by which we could fetter them to us - but they do not know enough of us to  appreciate  the  sacrifice  we  are  making,  and,  without  any  thought  of betrayal, betray our secrets to others:  so that as a consequence we perhaps lose our old acquaintances.
In the antechamber of favour. - People whom we keep standing a long time
in the antechamber of our favour start to ferment and turn sour.
Warning to the despised. - If you have unmistakably sunk in the estimation
of men you  should  hold on like  grim death to decorum in society with
others: otherwise you will betray to them that you have sunk in your own
estimation too. When a  man is cynical in society it is a sign that he treats
himself like a dog when he is alone.
Ennobling  ignorance.  - In  regard  to one's standing  in  the  estimation  of
those who accord estimation it is more advantageous clearly not to understand certain things. Ignorance too bestows privileges.
Opponents of gracefulness. - The arrogant and impatient do not like gracefulness and  sense  in it a bodily visible reproach; for gracefulness is tolerance of the heart as movement and gesture.
On meeting again. - When old friends meet again after a long separation it
often happens  that  they  feign an  interest  in  things mentioned to which
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
they  have in fact  grown quite indifferent:  and  sometimes both of them
notice this but dare  not lift the veil - from  a  sad  apprehension of what
they  might  see.  Thus  conversations  arise  like  those in the realm of the
dead.
Make friends  only  with  the industrious.  - The  idle  man is a  danger  to  his
friends: for, because he does not have enough to do, he talks about what
his  friends do and do not do,  finally involves himself in it and makes a
nuisance of himself:  for which  reason  it is  prudent  to  form  friendships
only with the industrious.
One weapon twice as good as two. - It is an unequal contest when one urges
his  cause  with  head  and  heart,  the  other  only with his head: the former
has as it were both sun and wind against him and his two weapons get in
the way of one another: he forfeits the prize - in the eyes of truth.  On the
other  hand,  the  victory  of the  latter  with  his  one  weapon  is  seldom  a
victory of the kind  admired  by all other spectators and it loses him their
sympathy.
Deep  waters  and  troubled  waters.  - The  public easily confuses  him  who
fishes in troubled waters  with  him who plumbs the depths.
Demonstrating one's vanity on friend and foe alike.  - Many people  mistreat
even  their  friends  out  of  vanity  when  there  are  witnesses  present  to
whom they want to demonstrate their superiority: and others exaggerate
the  worth  of their  foes so as to be able to  show  with  pride  that they are
worthy  of such foes.
Cooling. - The heating up of the heart is commonly associated with a sickness of the head and the judgement. He who is for a time concerned with the  health  of the  latter  must  therefore  know  what  it  is  he  has  to  cool
down:  unconcerned about the future of his heart! For if one is capable of
warming  up  at  all,  one  will  surely grow warm  again  and  have  one's
summer season.
Mixed feelings.  - Women and  selfish  children  feel  against  science  something compounded of envy and sentimentality.
When danger is greatest. - It is rare to break one's leg when in the course of
life one is toiling upwards - it happens much more often when one starts
to take things easy and to choose the easy paths.
Not too early. - One must take care not to become sharp too early - because
one will at the same time become thinly honed too early.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S  A N D   M A X I M S
Joy in recalcitrance. - A good educator knows cases in which he is proud of
the fact that his pupil remains true to himself in opposition to him: in those
cases, that is to say, in which the youth ought not to understand the man
or would be harmed if he did understand him.
Experiment with honour and honesty. - Youths who aspire to increase their
reputation for honour and honesty first seek out a man recognized as a
man of honour and attack him,  their purpose being to be considered his
equal by scolding and abusing him - and all the time with the thought
that this first experiment at any rate presents no danger, inasmuch as this
man of honour would be the last to censure or punish effrontery in pursuit of honesty and honour.
The eternal child. - We think that play and fairy tales belong to childhood:
how shortsighted that is! As though we would want at any time of life to
live without play and fairy tales! We give these things other names,  to be
sure,  and  feel  differently about  them,  but precisely this is  the  evidence
that they are the same things - for the child too regards play as his work
and fairy tales as his truth. The brevity of life ought to preserve us from a
pedantic division  of life  into  different  stages - as though each  brought
something  new  - and  a  poet  ought  for  once  to  present  a  man  of  two
hundred: one,  that is,  who really does live without play and fairy tales.
Every philosophy is a philosophy of a certain stage of life. - The stage of life at
which  a  philosopher  discovered  his  teaching  is  audible  within  it:  he
cannot prevent it,  however exalted above time and the hour he may feel
himself  to  be.  Thus  Schopenhauer's  philosophy  remains  the  reflected
image  of  passionate  and  dejected  youth - it  is  not  a  mode  of  thinking
proper  to  men  of older  years;  thus  Plato's  philosophy  recalls  the  midthirties, when a cold and hot current are accustomed to buffet against one another, so that spray and delicate little clouds are thrown up and,  under
favouring  circumstances  and  sunlight,  the  enchanting  image  of a  rainbow.
Of  the spirit of  women.  - The  spiritual power of a woman is best demonstrated by her sacrificing her own spirit to that of a man out of love of him and of his spirit but then,  despite  this  sacrifice,  immediately  evolving a
new spirit within the new domain,  originally alien to her nature, to which
the man's disposition impels her.
Sexual elevation  and  degradation. - The tempest of the  desires  sometimes
draws a man up to a height where all desire ceases: to that height where
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
he truly  loves and  dwells in a  better state of being  even  more  than in a
better  state  of volition.  And,  again,  a  good  woman  will  often  descend
from  true  love  down  to  desire  and  thereby  degrade  herself  in  her  own
eyes.  The latter especially  is  among  the  most  heart-moving  things  that
can accompany the idea of a good marriage.
Woman fulfils,  man  promises.  - Through  the  woman  nature  shows  the
point it has by now reached in its work on the image of mankind;  through
the man  it shows  what it had  to overcome in  attaining to  this point,  but
also  what  its  intentions  are  with  respect  to  mankind.  - The  complete
woman of every era  is the idleness of the creator on that  seventh day in
the creation of culture,  the repose of the  artist in his work.
Transplantation.  - If  we  have  employed  our  spirit  to  master  the  intemperance of the  affects,  we  have  perhaps achieved  this  at the expense  of transferring such intemperance to the spirit and  are henceforth dissolute
in thinking and the desire for knowledge.
Laughter as treason. - How and when a woman laughs is a mark of her culture: but in the sound of her laughter there is disclosed her nature, in the case of very cultured women perhaps even the last inextinguishable remnant of her nature. - That is why the psychologist will say with Horace, though  for a different reason: ridete puellae. *
From  the souls of  youths.  - In  their attitude  towards  one  and  the  same
person, youths alternate between devotion and impudence: the reason is
that at bottom it is only  themselves they are revering  and despising and
until experience has taught them the  measure of their own will and ability they cannot help  reeling  from one of these sensations to the other in their attitude towards themselves.
For the improvement of the world. - If we prevented the discontented,  atrabilious  and  sullen  from  propagating  themselves  we  could  magically transform  the  earth  into  a  garden  of happiness.  - This  proposition belongs in a practical philosophy for the female sex.
Trusting one's feelings.  - The  female  expression  that  one  ought  to  trust
one's  feelings  means  hardly  more  than  that one ought  to eat what one
likes the taste of. This may be a good everyday rule,  especially for sober
natures.  Other  natures,  however,  have  to  live  according  to  a  different
principle:  'you  must  eat,  not only  with  your mouth,  but also with your
head,  so that you shall not perish by the mouth's love of sweetmeats'.
•  ridete puellae: laugh, maidens.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D  M AX I M S
Love's cruel notion. - Every great love brings with it the cruel idea of killing
the object of that love,  so that he may be removed once and for all from
the  wicked  game  of  change:  for  love  dreads  change  more  than  it  does
destruction.
Doors. - The child sees,  just as the man does,  in everything he learns and
experiences doors: but to the former they are entrances,  to  the latter only
through-ways.
Sympathizing  women.  - The  sympathy  of  women,  which  is  garrulous,
bears the sick man's bed into the public market-place.
Precocious merit. - He who acquires merit while still young usually thereby forgets how to be respectful to age and to what is older and thus to his profound disadvantage excludes himself from  the  society of the  mature
and that which bestows maturity: so that in spite of his precocious merit
he remains green, importunate and boyish longer than others do.
Wholesale souls. - Women and artists think that when one does not contradict  them  one  could  not  contradict  them;  reverence  on  ten  points  and silent disapprobation on ten others seems to them impossible at the same
time, because they possess wholesale souls.
Youthful  talents.  - In  regard  to  youthful  talents  one  must  act  strictly  in
accordance with Goethe's maxim that it is often necessary to refrain from
attacking  error  so  as  not  to  attack  truth.  Their  condition  resembles  the
sicknesses  of  pregnancy  and -is  attended  by  strange  appetites:  these
one must satisfy and look after as far as one can for the sake of the fruit
one hopes they will produce.  As sick-nurse to these curious invalids one
must,  to be sure,  understand the difficult art of self-abasement.
Disgust at truth. - Women are so constituted that all truth regarding men,
love, children, society, the aim of life, disgusts them - and that they seek
to revenge themselves upon anyone who opens their eyes.
The source of great love. - Whence is the origin of the sudden passion - the
passion of the profound and inward kind - that a man feels for a woman?
Least of all from sensuality alone: but when a man encounters weakness
and need of assistance and at the same time high spirits together in the
same  being,  then  something  takes  place  in  him  like  the  sensation  of
his soul wanting to gush over: he is at the same moment moved and offended. At this point there arises the source of great love.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Cleanliness. - The sense for cleanliness should be kindled in a child to the
point of passion: later it will flame up in ever new transformations almost
to  the  height  of every  virtue  and  at  last  appear,  as an  attendant  to  all
talents,  like  an  aureole  of  purity,  moderation,  gentleness,  character -
bearing happiness within it,  spreading happiness around it.
28c}
Of vain old men. - Deep thought pertains to youth,  clear thought to age:
when old men nonetheless sometimes speak and write in the manner of
deep thinkers they do so out of vanity, in the belief that they will thereby
assume  the  charm  of enthusiastic youth,  evolving and full of hope  and
presentiment.
Employment  of  novelties.  - Men  employ  something  newly  learned  or
experienced henceforth as a ploughshare, perhaps also as a weapon: but
women straightway turn  it into  an  ornament for themselves.
How the two sexes act when they are in the right. - If you admit to a woman
that she is in the right,  she cannot refrain from setting her heel triumphantly  on the neck of the  defeated  - she has  to  enjoy victory  to  the  full; while between men  in such a  case  being  in the right usually produces a
feeling  of embarrassment.  As a  consequence  the  man  is accustomed  to
victory, while to the woman it comes as an exception.
Renunciation in the will to beauty. - If she is to become beautiful a woman
must not want to be considered pretty: that is to say, in ninety-nine cases
w_hen she could please she must disdain to please so as on the hundredth
occasion to harvest as a reward the ravishment of him the portal of whose
soul is great enough to admit greatness.
Inexplicable,  insupportable. - A  youth cannot grasp that an older man has
already lived through his raptures, daybreaks of feeling, turns and flights
of thought, once before: it even offends him to think they could have existed twice - but he grows altogether hostile when he hears that, if he is to become fruitful, he will  have to lose  these blossoms and do without their
fragrance.
Party with the air of the sufferer. - Every party that knows how to give itself
the air of the sufferer draws the hearts of the goodnatured over to it and
thereby itself acquires an air of goodnaturedness - to its profound advantage.
Assertion safer than proof. - An assertion produces a stronger effect than an
A S S OR T E D  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
argument, at least among the majority of mankind: for argument arouses
mistrust. That is why public speakers seek to hammer home their party's
arguments with assertions.
The best concealers. - All those who regularly enjoy success possess a profound  skill  in  always  exposing  their  errors  and  weaknesses  only  as apparent strengths; for which reason they have to know these errors and
weaknesses uncommonly well and with uncommon clarity.
From  time  to time.  - He  sat himself at the city  gate  and  said  to  one  who
passed  through  it  that  this was  the  city  gate.  The latter responded  that
this was true, but that one should not want to be too much in the right if
one  wanted  to  be  thanked  for  it.  Oh,  the  former  replied,  I  desire  no
thanks; but from time to time it is nonetheless very pleasant not only to be
in the right but to be acknowledged to be right as well.
Virtue was  not  invented by the Germans.  - Goethe's nobility  and  freedom
from envy,  Beethoven's noble hermit's resignation, Mozart's charm and
graciousness  of  the  heart,  Handel's  inflexible  manliness  and  freedom
under the law, Bach's confident and transfigured inner life which did not
even  need  to  renounce  fame  and  success  - are  these  supposed  to  be
German  qualities?  - If  not,  however,  it  at  least  shows  what  Germans
should strive after and what they can attain to.
Pia fraus or something else." - I  may  be wrong,  but  it seems to  me  that  in
contemporary Germany a twofold kind of hypocrisy has been  made the
duty of the moment for everyone: what is demanded is a Germanism out
of care for the political interests of the Reich and a Christianity out of fear
for the interests of society, both however only in words and demeanour
and especially in the ability to keep silent.  It is the gloss and varnish that
now costs so much, is paid for at such a rate: it is the spectators on whose
account the nation's face is assuming a  German- and Christian-looking
expression.
To what extent the half can be more than the whole even in the realm of the good. -
In the case of all things intended to endure and demanding the service of
many people much that is less good has to be made the rule, even though
the organizer is very well aware of what is better and more difficult: but
he will calculate on there never being any  lack of people able to be  adequate to the rule - and he knows that a  middling degree of strength is the rule.  - A youth is seldom able to comprehend  this,  and  then,  as a
newcomer,  he  is  amazed  at  how  much  in  the  right  he  is  and  how
strangely blind others are.
•  Pia fraus: pious fraud
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
The  party  man.  - The  genuine  party  man  no  longer  learns,  he  only
experiences  things  and  judges  them:  whereas  Solon,  who was  never  a
party man but pursued his aims beside and above the parties or in opposition  to  them,  is  significantly  the father of that simple saying in which there  lies enclosed the  health and inexhaustibility of Athens: 'I grow old
and  still  I go on learning.'
What, according to Goethe, is German. - The truly unendurable, from whom
one does not like to receive even what is good, are those who, possessing
freedom of  mind,  fail  to  notice they lack freedom of taste and spirit.  But precisely  this is,  according to  Goethe's  well-considered opinion,  German. -
His voice and  his  example  indicate that a  German has to be more than a
German if he wants to be useful,  indeed even endurable, to other nations
- and  in  what direction he  ought  to  strive in  order to  emerge  above  and
beyond  himself.
When  it  is  necessary  to  stand  still.  When  the  masses  begin  to  rage  and
-
reason grows dark,  one does well, if one is not quite sure of the health of
one's soul,  to step into a doorway and  take stock of the  weather.
Possessors  and  revolutionaries.  - The  only  weapon  against  socialism  you
still have at your command is not to challenge it: that is to say, yourselves
to live modestly and moderately,  as far as you can prevent the public display of extravagance and assist the state when it imposes heavy taxes on all  superfluities  and  things  that  resemble  luxuries.  Do  you  feel  disinclined to employ this weapon? In that case, you wealthy bourgeois who call yourselves  'liberal', admit to yourselves that it is the desires of your
own  heart  that  you  find  so  f.earful  and  threatening  in  the  socialists,
though in yourselves you consider them inevitable, as though there they
were something quite different. If, as you are now, you did not have your
property  and  your  worries  about  preserving  it,  these  desires  of  yours
would  make  of you  socialists:  possession  of property  is the  only  thing
that  distinguishes  you  from  them.  You  must  first  of all  conquer  yourselves  if you  want  any  kind  of victory  over  the  enemies  of your wealth and comfort. - And if only this wealth and comfort were true wellbeing! It
would  be  less  external  and  less  of  an  incitement  to envy,  it  would  be
shared  more,  be  more  benevolent,  more  minded  of  the  demands  of
equity,  more willing to lend a helping hand. But what is ungenuine and
histrionic in your pleasures,  which derive more from a sense of contrast
(that others do not have them and envy you) than from a sense of a fulfilment and enhancement of your powers - your houses, clothes, carriages, shop-windows,  gustatory  demands,  your  noisy  enthusiasm  for  music
and  opera,  finally your  women,  patterned and  moulded but out of base
metal,  gilded but without the ring of gold, chosen by you as showpieces,
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
offering themselves as showpieces: - these are the poison-bearing propagators  of  that  sickness  of  the  people  which,  as  socialist  scabies  of  the heart, is now spreading faster and faster among the masses but has its primary seat and incubator in you. And who is there now who can arrest this pestilence?
Party  tactics.  - When  a  party  notices  that  a  member  has  changed  from
being an unconditional adherent to a conditional one, it is so little capable
of enduring this that it tries, through incitements and insults of all kinds,
to bring him to  the point of outright defection and turn him into an opponent: for it has the suspicion that the intention of seeing in their faith something of relative value that admits of a For and Against,  a weighing
and distinguishing, is more dangerous to it than a wholesale opposition.
Strengthening a party. - If you want to strengthen the inner constitution of
a party  you should give it the opportunity of being  treated with obvious
injustice; it will thereby accumulate a capital of good conscience that it perhaps previously lacked.
Taking care of one's past. - Because men really respect only that which was
founded of old and has developed slowly,  he who wants to live on after
his death  must  take  care not only of his posterity but even more of his
past: which is why tyrants of every kind (including tyrannical artists and
politicians)  like  to do violence to  history,  so  that it may appear as preparation for and step-ladder to  them.
3o8
Party writers. - The drumbeat from which young writers in  the  service of
a party derive such satisfaction sounds to him  who does not belong to the
party like the rattling of chains and inspires pity rather than admiration.
Taking  sides against ourself.  - Our adherents  never forgive  us if we  take
sides against ourself: for in their eyes this means, not only to repulse their
love, but also to compromise their intelligence.
Danger in riches. - Only he who has spirit ought to have possessions: otherwise  possessions  are  a  public  danger.  For  the  possessor  who  does  not know how to make use of the free time which his possessions could purchase him will always continue to strive after possessions: this striving will constitute his entertainment,  his  strategy in  his  war  against boredom.
Thus in the end the moderate possessions that would suffice the man of
spirit are transformed into actual riches - riches which are in fact the glittering  product  of  spiritual  dependence  and  poverty.  They  only  appear quite different from what  their wretched origin  would  lead one to expect
because they are able to mask themselves with art and culture: for they
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
are, of course, able to purchase masks.  By this means they arouse envy in
the poorer and the uncultivated - who at bottom are envying culture and
fail to recognize the masks as masks - and gradually prepare a social revolution:  for  gilded  vulgarity  and  histrionic  self-inflation  in a  supposed
'enjoyment of culture'  instil into the latter the idea 'it is only a matter of
money' - whereas, while it is to some extent a matter of money, it is much
more a matter of spirit.
Jll
Pleasure in commanding and obeying. - Commanding and obeying both give
pleasure: the former when  it has not yet become a habit,  the latter however when  it has become a  habit.  Old  servants  under new masters  promote pleasure in one another.
J12
Ambition  for  the  advanced  post.  - There  is  an  ambition  to  occupy  the
advanced post which impels a party to venture into  extreme danger.
JlJ
When asses are needed. - You will never get the crowd to cry Hosanna until
you ride into town on an ass.
J14
Party custom. - Every party tries to  represent everything significant that
has  evolved  outside  itself  as  being  insignificant;  if  it  fails  in  this  endeavour, however, its animosity towards it is the more virulent the more exce Hen t it is.
J15
Becoming empty. - Of him who surrenders himself to events there remains
less  and  less.  Great  politicians  can thus become completely empty  men
and yet once have  been rich and full.
Jt6
Wished-for  enemies.  - The  socialist  movements  are now  more  welcome
than  fear-inspiring to the dynastic governments,  because through them
the latter  can get into  their  hands  the right and the weapons for taking the
exceptional measures with which they are able to strike at the figures that
really fill them  with  terror,  the democrats and anti-dynasts. - For all that
such governments publicly hate  they  now have  a  secret inclination and
affinity: they are obliged  to veil  their soul.
J17
Possessions possess. - It is only up to a certain point that possessions make
men  more independent and  free; one step further - and the possessions
become master, the possessor becomes a slave: as which he must sacrifice
to them  his  time and  his  thoughts and  henceforth feel himself obligated
to a society, nailed to a place and incorporated into a state none of which
perhaps meets his inner and essential needs.
J18
On the hegemony of men of knowledge. - It is easy, ridiculously easy, to erect
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S  A N D  M AX I M S
a model for  the election of a lawgiving body.  First of all the honest and
trustworthy  men  of  a  country who  are  at  the  same  time  masters  and
experts in one or another subject have to select one another through a
process  of  mutual  scenting out and  recognition:  in a  narrower  election
those experts and men of knowledge of the first rank in each department
of life must again choose one another,  likewise through mutual  recognition and  guaranteeing.  If  these  constituted  the  lawgiving body,  then finally  in each individual case only  the voices and judgements of those
expert in this specific matter would be decisive and all the rest would, as a
matter of honour and  simple decency,  leave the vote to them  alone:  so
that in the strictest sense the law would proceed out of the understanding
of those who understand best. - Now it is parties who vote: and at every
vote there must be  hundreds of abashed consciences - those of the illinformed and incapable of judgement, of those who merely repeat what they have heard, are drawn along and borne away. Nothing debases the
dignity of every new law so much as this clinging blush of dishonesty to
which  every  party  vote  constrains.  But,· as aforesaid,  it is easy,  ridiculously  easy,  to  �rect  such  a  thing:  no power in the world  is at present strong enough to bring anything better - unless,  that is,  a belief in the
supreme utility of science and the man of knowledge finally dawns even upon
the  most  malevolent  and  comes  to  be  preferred  to  the  now  dominant
belief in numbers. In the sense of this future let our watchword be: 'More
respect for the man of knowledge! And down with all parties!'
On  the  'nation of  thinkers'  (or of bad  thinking).  - The  obscure,  undecided,
ominous, elemental, intuitive elements - to employ unclear expressions
for unclear things - that are attributed to the German nature,  would,  if
they in fact existed,  be a proof that its culture was many steps retarded
and still enclosed within the spell and atmosphere of the Middle Ages. -
There  are,  to be sure,  certain  advantages  too  to be  found in such a  retardedness: with these qualities - if,  to repeat,  they should still possess them - the Germans would be qualified for certain things, and especially
to  understand  certain  things,  for  which  other  nations  have  lost  all
capacity. And much is lost, certainly, if lack of rationality - and that is what
these qualities have in common - is lost: but here, however,  there is no
loss  without  the  highest compensatory  gain,  so  that  no  ground at  all
exists  for  grief,  presupposing  one  does  not,  like  children  and  dainty
eaters, want to enjoy the fruits of every season at the same time.
Owls to Athens. - The governments of the  great states have in their hands
two means of keeping the people subject to them in fear and obedience: a
cruder one, the army, and a more refined one, the school. With the aid of
the  former  they enlist on  their  side  the  ambition  of the  higher and  the
energy of the lower strata, insofar as both are usually composed of active
and  vigorous  men  of  moderate  and  inferior  gifts;  with  the  aid  of the
other means they win for themselves the gifted poor,  and especially the
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
intellectually ambitious semi-poor of the middle classes.  Above all,  they
make of the teachers of every grade a spiritual princely household that involuntarily  looks  'upwards':  by  placing  obstacle  after  obstacle  in  the way of the private  school,  not to speak of education at home,  which they
greatly disfavour, they secure to themselves the disposal of a very significant number of teaching posts upon which there are certainly directed five times  the number of hungry and obsequious eyes than can ever be satisfied.  These  posts,  however,  must  offer  their  occupants  only  meagre nourishment:  thus there will be maintained in  them a feverish  thirst for
advancement and they will become even more closely attached to the aims
of the  government.  For  it  is  always  more  advantageous  to  cultivate  a
moderate  discontent  than  to  encourage  contentedness,  which  is  the
mother of courage  and  the grandmother of freethinking and  presumption.  Through the agency of this teaching body thus physically and spiritually  curbed  all the  youth of the  land  are,  as far as can be,  raised  to  a certain level of culture  graded according  to  the  needs and objectives of
the  state:  above all,  however,  the  immature  and  ambitious  spirits of all
classes  are  almost  imperceptibly  imbued  with  the  idea  that  only  a  lifecourse recognized and authorized by the state can bring immediate social distinction. The effect of this belief in state examinations and  state titles is
so extensive that even those who have remained independent, men who
have risen  through  trade or craft,  are still plagued by a thorn of discontent  until  their  position  too has been  noted  and recognized  from  above through the gracious bestowal of ranks  and  orders - until they  'have  no
need  to be ashamed'. Finally the  state attaches to all  those countless official posts and positions of profit in its possession the obligation to be educated and certificated by the state schools if one wishes to pass through these portals: the respect of society, bread for oneself, the possibility of a
family,  protection  from  above,  the  feeling of solidarity shared  by  those
with  a  common  upbringing  - all  this  constitutes  a  net  of  expectations
within  which  every  young  man  is  caught:  who  is  there  to  warn  him
against it!  If, after all this,  the obligation upon everyone to be a soldier for
some  years has  during the course of generations become an unthinking
habit  and  natural  event  in  accordance  with  which  one  tailors  the  programme of one's life, then the state can go on to venture the masterstroke of  weaving  together  school  and  army,  giftedness,  ambition  and  energy
through  the  offering  of advantages:  that  is  to  say,  by  enticing  the  more
highly gifted and cultivated into the army  with more favourable conditions
and imbuing them with the soldierly spirit of cheerful obedience, so that
they will perhaps  join  the colours  for an extended period and with their
talents create for them a new and ever more glittering reputation. - Nothing is then lacking but opportunities for great wars: and this will be taken care  of,  as a  professional matter and  thus  in  all  innocence,  by  the diplomats,  together  with  the  newspapers  and  stock  exchanges:  for  the
'nation',  as a  nation  of soldiers,  always  has a  good conscience when it
comes to wars, there is no need to worry about that.
ASSORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
The press.  - If we consider how even  now all great political  occurrences
creep on to the stage silent and  shrouded,  how they are concealed by insignificant events and seem small in proximity to them, how it is not until long after they have happened that their profound effects are felt and the
ground trembles - what significance can we then accord the press as it is
now, with its daily expenditure of lungpower on exclaiming,  deafening,
inciting, shocking - is it anything more than the permanent false alarm that
leads ears and senses off in the wrong direction?
After a great event. - A  man or a nation whose soul has come to light on the
occasion of a great event usually feels afterwards the need for a piece of
childishness or coarseness,  as  much out  of embarrassment as for the purpose of recovery.
To  be a good German means to degermanize oneself. - That in which national
differences are seen to consist is to a far greater degree than has yet been
realized only a difference between varying stages of culture and to a very
small extent something permanent  (and even this not in a strict sense) .
. That is why all argumentation on the basis of national character is so little
incumbent  upon  him  who  labours  at  the  transformation  of  convictions,
that  is  to  say  at  culture.  If we  consider,  for  example,  all  that  has been
German,  we  shall  at  once  improve  the  theoretical  question  'what  is
German?'  into  the  counter-question  'what is  now German?' - and  every
good  German  will give  it a  practical  answer  precisely by  overcoming  his
German  qualities.  For  whenever  a  people  goes  forward  and  grows  it
bursts  the  girdle  that  has  hitherto  given  it  its  national  appearance;  if  it
remains  stationary,  if it languishes,  a  new girdle  fastens  itself about  its
soul, the crust forming ever more firmly around it constructs as it were a
prison whose walls grow higher and  higher.  If,  therefore, a people possesses a great deal that is firm, this is a proof that it wants to become petrified and would like to turn itself into a monument: as from a certain point of  time  onwards  happened  with  Egypt.  He  therefore  who  has  the
interests of the Germans at heart should for his part see how he can grow
more and  more beyond  what  is German.  That  is why  a  change  into the
ungermanic has always been the mark of the most able of our people.
What a foreigner said. - A foreigner travelling in Germany gave offence and
pleasure through certain things he said according to where he was when
he said them. All Swabians with intelligence - he used to say - are coquettish. - The other Swabians,  however,  still thought that Uhland had been a poet and Goethe had been immoral. - The best thing about the German
novels now  so highly praised was  that you did not need to read  them:
you knew them already. - The Berliner seemed more goodnatured than
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U l'd A N
the South  German,  for he was  very fond of a joke  and could  therefore
take one against himself: which was not so with the South German. - The
minds  of  the  Germans  were  being  kept  down  by  their  beer  and  newspapers:  he  recommended  to them tea and  pamphlets,  though only as a cure of course. - He advised taking a look at how the various nations of
aged Europe each had a special knack of displaying some particular quality  of old age,  to the enjoyment of those  sitting before  this great  stage: how well the French represented the prudence and amiability of old age,
the  English  its  experience  and  restraint,  the  Italians  its  innocence  and
ingenuousness. Was it likely that the other masks of old age would not be
represented?  Where  was  arrogant  old  age?  Where  tyrannical  old  age?
Where avaricious old age? - The most dangerous region of Germany was
Saxony and Thuringia: nowhere else was there more intellectual activity
and  knowledge  of human  nature,  together  with  free-spiritedness,  and
yet it was all so modestly concealed by  the ugly dialect of the populace
and their eagerness to be of service that you hardly noticed that what you
were dealing with was the intellectual sergeant-majors of Germany and
its  instructors  in  good and evil. - The  arrogance  of the North Germans
was  kept  within  bounds  by  their  inclination  to  obedience,  that  of  the
South Germans by their inclination to indolence. - It seemed  to him that
German  men had  in  their women  inept but very self-confident housewives: they persistently spoke so well of themselves they had convinced almost all  the  world,  and  in any  event  their  men,  of the existence of a
peculiarly German housewifely virtue. - When conversation then turned
to  Germany's  internal  and external  politics,  he was accustomed to say or,  as he put it, to disclose - that Germany's greatest statesman did not believe in great statesmen. - The future of the Germans he found threatened  and  threatening:  for  they  had  forgotten  how  to enjoy  themselves (which  the  Italians  understand  so  well)  but  through  the  great game  of
chance of wars and dynastic revolutions  became accustomed  to  emotion,
consequently  they  would  one  day  have  an  uprising.  For  this  was  the
strongest  emotion  a  people  could  procure  for  itself.  - The  reason  the
German socialist was the most dangerous was that he was driven by no
definite need; he suffered from not knowing what he wanted; thus, even if
he achieved a great deal, he would languish from desire even in the midst
of plenty just like Faust,  though presumably like a very plebeian Faust.
'For Bismarck has  driven  out of the cultivated  Germans  the Faust Devil
that  plagued  them  so',  he  cried  in  conclusion:  'but  now  the  Devil  has
entered into the swine and is worse than ever he was!'
Opinions. - Most  people  are  nothing  and  count  for  nothing  until  they
have  clad  themselves  in  general  convictions  and  public  opinions  - in
accordance with the tailor's philosophy: clothes make the man. In regard
to  exceptional  men,  however,  the  saying  should  read:  only  the  wearer
creates  the  costume;  here  opinions  cease  from  being  public  and  become
something other than masks, finery and camouflage.
A S S O RT E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
Two kinds of sobriety. - So as not to confuse sobriety out of exhaustion with
sobriety  out  of  moderation  one  has  to  observe  that  the  former  is  illtempered, the latter cheerful.
Adulteration of joy. - Not to call something good a day longer than it seems
to  us good,  and above  all:  not a day sooner  that is the only way  of pre
-
serving the  genuiness  of joy:  which  otherwise  all  too  easily  grows  pale
and insipid to the palate and is now among the adulterated provisions of
life for whole strata of the people.
The scapegoat of virtue. - When a man does the best he can, those who wish
him well but are not adequate to his deed promptly seek out a goat so as
to slaughter it, believing it to be the scapegoat - but it is in fact the scapegoat,  not of sin, but of virtue.
Sovereignty. - To revere the bad, too, and to embrace it, if it pleases us, and
to have no idea that we  might be ashamed  of being thus pleased,  is the
mark of sovereignty, in great things and small.
Effect a  phantom,  not  reality.  - The  significant  man  gradually  learns  that
insofar as he produces an effect he is a phantom  in the heads of others,  and
perhaps his soul begins to torment him with the subtle question whether
he is not obliged to preserve and maintain this phantom of himself for the
benefit of his fellow men.
Giving and taking. - If we have taken from someone the slightest thing (or
prevented him from having it), he is blind to the fact that we have given
him much greater, indeed even the greatest things.
The fruitful field. - All rejection  and  negation  points to a  lack of fruitfulness:  if  only  we  were  fruitful  fields,  we  would  at  bottom  let  nothing perish unused and see in every event, thing and man welcome manure,
rain or sunshine.
Society as enjoyment. - If a  man deliberately renounces others and keeps
himself in solitude,  he can thereby make of the society of men, enjoyed
rarely, a rare delicacy.
Knowing how to suffer  publicly.  - We  must  display our unhappiness  and
from time to time be heard to sigh, be seen to be impatient: for if we let
others see how happy and secure in ourselves we are in spite of suffering
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
and deprivation, how malicious and envious we would make them! - We
have to take care not to corrupt our fellow men; moreover, they would in
the instance referred  to  impose  upon us a heavy impost,  and our public
suffering is in any event also our private advantage.
Warmth  in  the  heights.  - It is  warmer  in the  heights  than  people  in  the
valleys think, especially in winter.  The  thinker will know what is meant
by this metaphor.
Willing the good, achieving the beautiful.  It is not enough  to practise  the
-·
good,  one must have willed it  and,  in the words  of the poet,  receive the
divinity into one's will. But one may not will the beautiful, one must be able
to  achieve  it,  in  blindness  and  innocence,  without  anything  of  the  inquisitiveness of Psyche. He who lights his lantern to seek out perfect men should take note of this sign: they are those who always act for the sake of
the  good  and  in  doing  so always attain  to  the  beautiful  without  giving
thought to it.  For many of the better and nobler sort present, for all their
good  will  and good  works,  an unpleasant and  ugly aspect for  lack of a
beautiful soul and its capacities; we recoil from them, and even virtue is
done harm to by the repellent garb in which their bad taste dresses it.
Danger in renunciation. - We must take care not to establish our life on too
narrow an area of desires: for if we renounce the joys  that position, honours,  companionship,  sensual  pleasures,  comforts,  the  arts  afford,  the day  may  come  when  we  discover  that  through  doing  without  these
things  we have  acquired  for a  neighbour,  not wisdom,  but boredom  with
life.
Final opinion about opinions. - One should either conceal one's opinions or
conceal oneself behind one's opinions.  He who does otherwise does not
know the ways of the world or belongs to the order of holy foolhardiness.
'Gaudeamus igitur'. * - Joy must contain edifying and healing powers  for
the moral nature of man too: how otherwise could it happen that, as soon
as it reposes in the sunlight of joy,  our soul involuntarily promises itself
'to be  good',  'to  become  perfect',  and  that  as  it does  so  it is  seized  as
though by a blissful shudder with a presentiment of perfection?
To one who is praised. - So long as you are praised think only that you are
not yet on your own path but on that of another.
Loving the master. - The apprentice loves the master differently from the
way the master loves him.
•'Gaudeamus igitur': Let us then rejoice.
A S S O R T E D   O PI N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
All too beautiful and human. - 'Nature is too beautiful for you, poor mortal'
- this  feeling  is  by  no  means  rare:  yet  once or twice,  when  I  have  intimately  observed all  that  is  human,  all  its  abundance,  strength,  tenderness,  complicatedness,  it has seemed to me as though I had to say in all humility: 'man too is too beautiful for the man who reflects on him!' - and
I do not mean some particular kind of man,  moral man for instance, but
every man.
Movable goods and landed property. - If life has treated a man like a brigand,
and  has  taken  from  him  all  it  could  in  the  way  of  honours,  friends,
adherents,  health,  possessions of all  kinds,  he  may perhaps,  after the
first shock, discover that he is richer than before. For it is only now that he
knows what is truly his,  what no brigand is able to get his hands on; so
that he perhaps emerges out of all this plundering and confusion wearing
the noble aspect of a great landed proprietor.
Involuntarily an ideal. - The most painful feeling there is,  is to discover that
one  is always taken for something  higher  than  one  is.  For  one  is  then
obliged to admit to oneself: something in you is lies and deception, your
words, the impression you make, your glance, your actions - and this deceptive something is as necessary as your honesty in other matters but continually undermines the effect of this honesty and devalues it.
Idealist and liar. - We should not let ourselves be tyrannized over by our
fairest ability - that of elevating things into the ideal:  otherwise one day
truth will  depart from  us with the angry  words:  'you liar from  the very
heart,  what have I to do with you?'
Being misunderstood. - If we are misunderstood as a whole, it is impossible
completely  to eradicate misunderstanding on any one individual point.
We have to realize this if we are not to squander superfluous energy on
our own defence.
The water-drinker speaks. - Go on drinking the wine that has refreshed you
all your life - what is it to you that I have to be a water-drinker? Are wine
and water not peaceable,  fraternal elements which dwell side by side in
harmony?
From the land of the cannibals. - In solitude the solitary man consumes himself, in the crowd the crowd consumes  him.  Now choose.
At the freezing-point of the will. - 'It will come, one day, that hour that will
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O  H U M A N
envelope you in a golden cloud where there is no pain:  where  the  soul
has  the  enjoyment of its  own  weariness  and,  happy in a  patient  game
with  its  own  patience,  is like  the  waves  of a  lake  which,  reflecting  the
colours of an evening sky on a  quiet  summer's day,  lap and lap against
the  bank and  then  are  still  again - without  end,  without  aim,  without
satiation,  without  desire - all repose  that rejoices in change,  all ebbing
back and  flooding forward  with  the pulsebeat of nature.' This is how all
invalids  feel  and  speak:  but  if  they  do  attain  to that hour there arrives,
after brief enjoyment, boredom. This, however, is a thawing wind for the
frozen will: it awakens, stirs itself, and again engenders wish upon wish.
- To wish is a sign of recovery or improvement.
The disavowed  ideal.  It  happens  exceptionally  that  a  man  achieves  his
-
highest flight only when he disavows his ideal:  for this ideal has hitherto
driven  him  too  impetuously,  so  that he  has  got out of breath  half way
along every path he has taken and has had -to come to a standstill.
Revealing propensity. - It should be regarded as a sign that a man suffers
from envy but is  striving  for  higher  things  when he  feels drawn by  the
idea that in face of the man of excellence there is only one way of escape:
love.
Bonheur de l'escalier.* - Just  as many people's wit fails to keep pace with
the opportunity for it,  so that the opportunity has already gone out of the
door  while  the wit is still  standing on the stairs:  so  others  experience a
kind of bonheur de l'escalier which runs too slowly always  to stay by  the
side  of fleet-footed time: the best they get to enjoy  of an  event,  or of an
entire period of their life,  falls to them only a long time afterwards, and
then  often  only  as  a  feeble,  spicy  fragrance  that  awakens  sorrow  and
longing - as though it had once been possible to imbibe this element to
the full,  though now it is too late.
Worms.  It says nothing against the ripeness of a spirit that it has a few
-
worms.
The seat of victory. - A good posture on a horse robs your opponent of his
courage and your audience of their hearts - why do you need to attack?
Sit like one who has conquered!
Danger  in admiration. - Through too great admiration  for  the virtues of
others it is possible to lose interest in one's own and from lack of practice
finally lose them altogether  without acquiring those of others in return.
•  Bonheur de l'esca/ier:  Nietzsche's  play  on  '/'esprit de /'escalier' ,  the disposition  to  react  only
late after the event.
A S S O R T E D  O P I N I O N S   A N D  M A X I M S
Usefulness of sickliness. - He who is often sick does not only have a much
greater enjoyment of health  on account of the frequency with which he
gets  well:  he also  has a  greatly  enhanced  sense of  what  is healthy  and
what sick in works and actions,  his own and those of others:  so that it is
precisely  the  sickliest  writers,  for  example  - and  almost  all  the  great
writers are,  unfortunately,  among them - who usually evidence in their
writings a much steadier and more certain tone  of health, because they
understand the philosophy of psychical health and recovery better and
are better acquainted with its teachers - morning, sunshine,  forests and
springs - than the physically robust.
Disloyalty,  condition of mastership. - There is  nothing  to be done about it:
every master has only one pupil - and he becomes disloyal to him - for he
too is destined for mastership.
Never  in  vain.  - In the  mountains  of  truth you  will never climb  in  vain:
either you will get up higher today or you will exercise your strength so as
to be able to get up higher tomorrow.
Before  an  ancient  window.  Is  what  you  see  of  the  world  through  this
-
window so beautiful,  then,  that you have lost all desire to look through
any other - and even try to prevent others from doing so?
Indication of violent changes. - If we dream of people we have long since forgotten  or  who  have  for  long been  dead,  it is a  sign  that we  have  gone through a violent change within ourself and that the ground upon which
we live has been completely turned over: so that the dead rise up and our
antiquity becomes our modernity.
Medicine of the soul. - Lying still and thinking little is the cheapest medicine  for  all  sicknesses  of  the  soul  and,  if persisted  with,  grows  more pleasant hour by hour.
On spiritual order of rank. - It  ranks you  far beneath him that you  seek to
establish the exceptions while he seeks  to establish the  rule.
The fatalist. - You have to believe in fate - science can compel you to. What
then  grows  out  of this  belief  in  your  case  - cowardice,  resignation  or
frankness and  magnanimity - bears  witness  to the soil upon which that
seedcorn has been scattered but not, however, to the seedcorn itself - for
out of this anything and everything can grow.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Ground of much  ill-humour.  - He  who  prefers  the  beautiful  in  life  to  the
useful will,  like a child who prefers sweets to bread, certainly end by ruining his digestion and will look out on the world very ill-humouredly.
Excess as cure. - One can reacquire a taste for one's own talents by revering
and enjoying antithetical talents for a long  time  to excess. - The employment of excess as a cure is one of the more refined artifices in the art of living.
'Will a self'. - Active,  successful  natures act,  not according to  the  dictum
'know thyself', but as if there hovered before  them the commandment:
will a self and thou shalt become a self. - Fate seems to have left the choice
still up to them; whereas the inactive and contemplative cogitate on what
they have already  chosen,  on one occasion, when they entered into life.
Living  without followers. - We grasp how  little  adherents are  worth  only
when we have ceased to be an  adherent of our adherents.
Darkening ourselves. - If we are to get free of the troublesome gnat-swarms
of our admirers we have to know how to darken ourselves.
Boredom. - There is a boredom known to the most refined and cultivated
l)eads to  whom  the best the  earth  has  to  offer  has  become  stale:  accustomed to eating choice and ever choicer food and to disgust with the coarser,  they are in  danger of starving to death - for of the very best there is very little, and sometimes it has become inaccessible or rock-hard, so that
even good teeth cannot bite into it.
Danger in admiration. - Admiration for a quality or an art  can be so great it
can  hinder us  from  striving to possess it.
What we desire of art. - One man wants to enjoy his own nature by means
of art,  another  wants with its aid to get above and away from his nature
for a time. In accordance with both needs there exists a twofold species of
art and artist.
Apostasy. - He who reneges on us perhaps does not thereby offend us but
he certainly offends our adherents.
After death. - Usually it is only long after a man's death that we find it in-
A S S O R T E D  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
comprehensible that he is no longer here: in the case of very great men
often only after decades.  He who is honest usually feels when someone
dies  that  he  has  really been  deprived  of very  little  and  that the  solemn
funeral orator is a  hypocrite.  Only when  we  need  him  do we learn  the
necessity of an  individual,  and his true epitaph is a late sigh.
Leaving in Hades. - There are many  things we  must leave in the Hades  of
half-conscious  feeling,  and  not  desire  to  redeem  them  out  of  their
shadow  existence,  otherwise they  will,  as  thoughts and words,  become
our demonic masters and cruelly demand  our blood of us.
Closeness of beggary. - Even  the richest spirit occasionally loses the key to
the  chamber  where  his  hoarded  treasure  lies,  and  is  then  no  different
from the poorest,  who has to beg merely to stay alive.
Chain-thinkers. - To him who has thought a great deal every new thought
he hears or reads at once appears in the form of a link in a chain.
Pity. - In the gilded sheath of pity there is sometimes stuck the dagger of
envy.
What is genius? - To will an exalted end and the means to  it.
Fighter's vanity. - He who  has  no  hope  of winning a fight,  or has  plainly
lost it,  is all the more anxious to secure admiration for the way in which
he has fought it.
The  philosophical  life  is  misinterpreted.
At  the  moment  when  anyone
-
begins to take philosophy seriously all the world believes the opposite.
Imitation. - The bad acquires esteem by being imitated, the good loses it especially in art.
Ultimate lesson of history.  'Ah, if only I had lived  in those days!' - that is
-
the  speech  of foolish  and  trifling  men.  Every  piece  of history  one  has
studied seriously,  though it be  that  of the  most  lauded  land  of the past,
will rather lead one to exclaim at last: 'Anything rather than back to that!
The spirit of that age would press upon you with the weight of a hundred
atmospheres, the good and beautiful in it you would not enjoy, the bad in
it you would not be able to digest.' - Posterity can be relied on to pass the
same judgement on our own age:  it will have been intolerable,  life in it
unliveable. - And yet does not everyone endure it in his own age? - Yes,
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
and the reason is that the spirit of his age does not only lie upon him but is
also within  him.  The spirit of the age offers resistance to itself,  bears  up
against itself.
Nobility as mask.  With nobility of bearing we provoke our enemies, with
-
unconcealed envy we almost reconcile them with us: for envy compares,
equates,  it is an  involuntary  and  groaning  kind  of  modesty.  - Has,  on
account  of this advantage,  envy ever been  assumed  as a mask by  those
who were in fact  not envious?  Perhaps;  it is certain,  however,  that nobility of bearing is often employed as a mask for envy by ambitious people who would  rather suffer  disadvantages and provoke  their enemies than
let it be  seen that inwardly they equate themselves with them.
Unforgivable.  - You  gave  him  an  opportunity  of  showing  greatness  of
character and he did not seize it.  He will never forgive you for that.
Anti-theses.  The most senile thing ever thought about man is contained
-
in the  celebrated  saying  'the  ego is always hateful'; the most childish in
the even more celebrated 'love thy neighbour as thyself' .  - In the former
knowledge of human  nature has ceased,  in the latter it has not yet even
begun.
The missing ear. - 'So long as one always lays the blame on others one still
belongs to the mob, when one always assumes responsibility oneself one
is on the path of wisdom; but the wise man blames no one,  neither himself  nor  others.' - Who  says  this? - Epictetus,  eighteen  hundred  years ago.  - It was  heard  but  forgotten. - No,  it was not heard and forgotten:
not everything gets forgotten. But there was lacking an ear for it, the ear
of  Epictetus.  - So  did  he  say  it into  his  own  ear? - Yes,  that  is  how it
is:  wisdom  is  the whispering of the  solitary  to himself in the crowded
marketplace.
Error of standpoint,  not of eye. - We always stand a few paces too close to
ourselves,  and always a few paces too  distant from our neighbour. So it
happens that we judge him too much wholesale and ourselves too much
by individual, occasional, insignificant traits and occurrences.
Ignorance in arms. - How  little  we  mind whether another knows or does
not know something - whereas he perhaps sweats blood at the very idea
of being  thought  ignorant  in  the  matter.  There  are,  indeed,  egregious
fools who go about armed with a quiver full of anathemas and peremptory decrees, ready to shoot down anyone who exposes the fact that there are things  in which his judgement does not count.
A S S ORTED  O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
At  the  inn-table of experience.  People  who,  out  of  inborn  moderation,
-
leave every glass standing only half-emptied refuse to admit that everything in the world has its dregs and sediment.
Singing  birds.  - The  adherents  of a  great  man  are  accustomed  to  blind
themselves the better to sing his praises.
Not up to  it. - The good displeases us when we are not up to it.
The rule as mother or as child. - The condition  that gives birth to the rule is
different from the condition  the rule gives birth to.
Comedy.  - We  sometimes  harvest  love  and  honour  for  deeds  or  works
which we have long since cast from us like a skin: and then we are easily
tempted to  play  the comedians of our own past and throw our old hide
back over our shoulders - and not only out of vanity but also from goodwill towards our admirers.
Biographers' error. - The small amount of force required to push a boat into
the river should not be confused with the force of this river that thereafter
bears it along: but this confusion exists in almost all biographies.
Do not buy too dear. - What we buy too dear we usually make bad use of,
because we do so without love and with painful recollections - and thus
w� suffer a twofold disadvantage from it.
Which philosophy society is always in need of.  The pillars of the social order
-
rest on this foundation: that everyone cheerfully regards that which he is,
does and strives after,  his  health  or sickness,  his poverty or prosperity,
his honour or  insignificance,  and feels as he does so 'I would not change
places with anyone.' - He  who  wants to influence the order of society has
only to implant into  people's hearts  this  philosophy of cheerful rejection
of changing places and absence of envy.
Mark of  the noble soul. - A  noble soul is  not  that  which  is capable of the
highest flights but that which rises little and falls little but dwells permanently in a free,  translucent atmosphere and elevation.
Greatness and those who see it.  - The finest effect of greatness is that it bestows on those who see it a magnificatory and discriminating eye.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
Being  satisfied.
That  maturity  of  understanding  has  been  attained  is
-
manifested  in  the  fact  that  one  no  longer  repairs  to  where  rare  flowers
stand among the thorniest hedgerows of knowledge but is satisfied with
garden,  forest,  field and  meadow, in the knowledge that life is too short
for the rare and extraordinary.
Advantage in privation. - He who dwells always in warmth and fullness of
heart and as it were in the summer air of the soul can have no idea of that
shuddery rapture which seizes on wintery natures who are by way of exception  touched  by rays of love and  the cool breath of a sunny February day.
Recipe for the sufferer. - Is the burden of living becoming too heavy for you?
- Then you  must increase the burden of your life.  When the sufferer at
last thirsts for the river of Lethe and seeks it - he must become a hero if he
is to be sure of finding it.
The judge. - He who has beheld anyone's iqeal is his inexorable judge and
as it were his bad conscience.
Utility of great renunciation. - The most useful thing about a great renunciation is that it communicates to us that pride in virtue through which we are from then on able easily to demand of ourselves many petty renunciations.
How duty acquires lustre. - The means of transforming your iron duty into
gold in everyone's eyes is: always to perform a little more than you promise.
Prayer to men. - 'Forgive us our virtues' - that is how one should pray to
men.
Those who create and  those who enjoy.  - Everyone who enjoys believes  the
tree was concerned  about  the fruit;  but it  was,  in  fact,  concerned about
the seed. - It is in this that there lies the difference between all who create
and all who enjoy.
The glory of the great. - Of what account is genius if it does not communicate to him who contemplates and reveres it such freedom and elevation of  feeling  that  he  no  longer  has  need  of  genius!  Rendering  themselves
-
superfluous - that is the  glory of all great men.
A S S O R T E D   O P I N I O N S   A N D   M A X I M S
Descent into Hades.  I  too  have been  in  the underworld,  like  Odysseus,
-
and will often be  there again;  and  I have not sacrificed only rams to be
able to talk with  the dead,  but have not spared my  own blood as  well.
There  have  been  four  pairs  who  did  not  refuse  themselves  to  me,  the
sacrificer:  Epicurus  and  Montaigne,  Goethe  and  Spinoza,  Plato  and
Rousseau,  Pascal  and Schopenhauer.  With  these I have had  to come to
terms when  I have wandered long alone,  from them will I accept judgement,  to  them will  I  listen when  in  doing so they judge one another.
Whatever I say, resolve, cogitate for myself and others: upon these eight I
fix my eyes and see theirs fixed  upon me. - May  the living forgive me if
they sometimes appear to me as shades, so pale and ill-humoured, so restless and, alas! so lusting for life: whereas those others then seem to me so alive, as though now, after death, they could never again grow weary of
life.  Eternal liveliness,  however,  is what counts:  what do 'eternal life',  or
life at all, matter to us!
PAR T  TWO
THE WANDERER
AND
HIS SHADOW
The Shndow: As it is so long since I heard your voice, I would like to give
you an opportunity of speaking.
The  Wanderer: Someone said something: - where? and who? It almost
seems as  though  it were I  myself speaking,  though in an  even weaker
voice than mine.
The Shadow (after a pause):  Are you not glad to have an opportunity of
speaking?
The Wanderer: By God  and  all  the  things  I  oo  not believe  in,  it is  my
shadow speaking; I hear it but I do not believe it.
The Shadow: Let us accept it and think no more about it: in an hour it will
all be over.
The Wanderer: That is just what I thought when, in a wood near Pisa, I
saw first two and then five camels.
The  Shadow:  It is well we  are both indulgent if our understanding for
once  comes  to  a  stop:  thus we  shall converse  together without recriminations and not press one another too hard if we fail to understand something the other has said. If we know not what to reply, it will be enough to say something: it is under this reasonable condition that I agree to converse with anyone.  In a  long discussion even the wisest of us is once a fool and three times a simpleton.
The Wanderer: Your modesty is not flattering to him you confess it to.
The Shadow: Ought I, then, to flatter?
The Wanderer: I thought a man's shadow was his vanity: but his vanity
would never ask: 'ought I, then,  to flatter?'
The Shadow: Neither does a man's vanity, insofar as I know it, ask, as I
have  asked  twice  already,  whether  it  may  speak;  it  never  ceases  from
speaking.
The Wanderer: Only now do I notice how impolite I am towards you, my
beloved shadow: I have  not yet said a word of how very much I rejoice to
hear you and not merely to see you.  You will know that I love shadow
as much as I love light.  For there to be beauty of face, clarity of speech,
benevolence and firmness of character, shadow is as needful as light. They
are not opponents: they stand, rather, lovingly hand  in hand, and when
light disappears, shadow slips away after it.
The Shadow: And I hate the same thing you hate: night. I love mankind
because they are disciples of light,  and I rejoice in the gleam that burns
in their eyes when  they discover and acquire knowledge,  indefatigable
knowers and discoverers that they are. That shadow all things cast whenever the sunlight of knowledge falls upon them - that shadow too am I.
}01
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
The  Wanderer:  I  believe  I  understand  you,  even  though  your  expressions are somewhat shadowy.  But you were right:  good friends now and then exchange an obscure word as a sign of agreement which to any third
party  is  intended  for  an  enigma.  And  we  are  good  friends.  And  so
enough  preamble!  There  are  a  couple  of  hundred  questions  pressing
upon my soul, and the time you have in which to answer them is perhaps
only  brief.  Let  us  hasten  to  see  what  there  is  we  can  peaceably  agree
upon.
The Shadow: But shadows are more bashful than men: promise you will
tell no one how we talked together!
The Wanderer: How we talked together? Heaven defend me from longspun-out  literary  conversations!  If  Plato  had  taken  less  pleasure  in spinning-out his readers would take more pleasure in Plato.  A  conversation that gives delight in reality is, if transformed into writing and read, a painting with nothing but  false perspectives:  everything  is too long or
too short. - But shall I perhaps be permitted to tell what it was we were in
accord over?
The Shadow: That I am content with; for they will all recognize in it only
your opinions:  no one will think of the shadow.
The Wanderer:  Perhaps  you  are  wrong,  my  friend!  Up  to  now  people
have perceived in my  opinions more shadow than me.
The Shadow: More shadow than light! Is it possible?
The Wanderer:  Be  serious,  dear  fool!  My  very  first  question  demands
seriousness. -
Of the tree of knowledge.  Probability but no truth: appearance of freedom
-
but no freedom - it is on account of these two fruits that the tree of knowledge cannot be confounded with the tree of life.
The rationality of the world. - That the world is not the epitome of an eternal
rationality can be conclusively proved by the fact that that piece of the world
which  we  know - I  mean  our  own  human  rationality - is  not  so  very
rational.  And  if it is not  always  perfectly wise and rational,  then the rest
of the world  will  not be so either; here the conclusion a minori ad majus, a
parte ad tatum,* applies,  and does so with decisive force.
'In the beginning'. - To glorify the origin - that is  the  metaphysical after-
shoot that breaks out when we meditate on history and makes us believe
that what  stands at the beginning of all things is also what is most valuable and essential.
Standard for the value of truth. - The effort required to climb a mountain is
certainly not the  standard  by which to assess its height.  And are  things
supposed to be different in the case of science! - do some who would like
•  'a minori . . .  ad totum': from the less to  the greater, from the part to the whole.
J02
THE  W A N D E RE R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
to be accounted initiates tell us that the effort required to attain to truth is
to decide the value of truth! This mad morality derives from the idea that
'truths' are really nothing more than gymnastic  apparatus  upon which
we are supposed bravely to work ourselves to exhaustion - a morality for
athletes and  gymnasts of the spirit.
Linguistic usage and reality.  - There  exists a  feigned  disrespect  for all the
things which  men  in  fact  take  most  seriously,  for all the things closest  to
them.  One says,  for example,  'one eats only in order to live' - which is a
damned lie, as is that which speaks of the begetting of children as the real
objective  of all  voluptuousness.  Conversely,  the  high  esteem  in  which
the  'most  serious  things'  are  held  is  almost  never  quite  genuine:  the
priests and metaphysicians, to be sure, have in these domains altogether
accustomed us to a feignedly exaggerated linguistic usage, but they have
not converted the feeling which refuses to take these most serious things
as  seriously as  those  despised  closest  things.  - An  unfortunate  consequence  of  this  twofold  hypocrisy,  however,  is  always  that  the  closest things, for example eating,  housing,  clothing,  social intercourse, are not
made the object of constant impartial and general reflection and reform:
because  these  things  are  accounted  degrading,  they  are  deprived  of
serious intellectual and artistic consideration; so that here habit and frivolity easily carry off the victory over the unthinking,  especially over inexperienced youth: while on the other hand our continual offences against the most elementary laws of the body and the spirit reduce us all, young
and  old,  to  a  disgraceful dependence and bondage - I  mean  to  that,  at
bottom  wholly  unnecessary  dependence  on  physicians,  teachers  and
curers of souls who still lie like a burden on the whole of society.
Earthly frailty and its chief cause. - When we look around us we can always
encounter  people  who  have  eaten  eggs  all  their  lives  and  have  never
noticed that the longer ones are the best tasting,  who do not know that a
thunderstorm  is  beneficial  to  the  bowels,  that  pleasant  odours  smell
stronger  in  cold  clear  air,  that  our  sense  of taste  differs  with  differing
phases of the moon, that speaking well or listening intently at mealtimes
is harmful to the stomach. Even if these examples of a lack of the power of
observation  may  seem  inadequate,  one  is  bound  to  admit  that  most
people see the closest things of all very badly and very rarely pay heed to
them.  And  is this  a  matter of indifference? - One  should consi�er that
almost all the physical and psychical frailties of the individual derive from this
lack: not knowing what is beneficial to us and what harmful in the institution of our mode of life, in the division of the day, in for how long and with whom we enjoy social intercourse,  in profession and leisure,  commanding and  obeying,  feeling  for  art  and  nature,  eating,  sleeping  and reflecting; being unknowledgeable in the smallest and most everyday things and
failing to keep an eye on them - this it is that transforms the earth for so
many into a 'vale of tears'. Let it not be said that, here as everywhere, it is
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
a question of human lack of understanding: on the contrary - there exists
enough, and more than enough understanding, only it is employed in the
wrong  direction  and  artificially  diverted  away  from  these  smallest  and
closest  things.  Priests  and  teachers,  and  the  sublime  lust for  power  of
idealists of every  description,  the  cruder and  the more refined,  hammer
even into children that what matters is something quite different: the salvation of the soul,  the service of the state,  the advancement of science, or the accumulation of reputation and possessions, all as the means of doing
service to mankind  as a whole; while the requirements of the individual,
his great and small needs within the twenty-four hours of the day, are to
be  regarded  as  something  contemptible  or  a  matter  of  indifference.  -
Already  in  ancient  Greece  Socrates  was defending  himself  with  all  his
might  against  this arrogant neglect of the  human  for the benefit of the
human  race,  and  loved  to  indicate  the  true  compass and  content of all
reflection  and concern with an expression of Homer's:  it comprises,  he
said,  nothing other  than  'that which I  encounter of good  and  ill in my
own house'.
Two means of consolation. - Epicurus,  the  soul-soother of later antiquity,
had that wonderful insight, which is still today so rarely to be discovered,
that to quieten the heart it is absolutely not necessary to have solved the
ultimate  and  outermost  theoretical  questions.  Thus  to  those  tormented
by 'fear of the  gods'  it sufficed him  to  say:  'if the gods exist they do not
concern themselves with us' - instead of indulging in fruitless and distant
disputation over the ultimate question whether the gods do in fact exist.
This position is much more favourable and much stronger: one gives the
other a  few  steps  advantage and  thus  makes him more  willing  to listen
and  ponder.  As  soon,  however,  as  he  sets  about  demonstrating  the
opposite  - that  the  gods  do  concern  themselves  with  us  - into  what
wrong paths and thorny thickets the poor fellow must stray, entirely of
his  own  volition  and  not  through  any  cunning of his  interlocutor,  who
needs only to possess sufficient humanity and subtlety to conceal the pity
he feels at this  spectacle.  At last this other will arrive at a feeling of disgust,  the strongest argument against any proposition, disgust at his own assertion; he will cool down and depart in the same mood as that which
characterizes the pure  atheist:  'what  do the  gods  matter to me anyway!
The devil take them!' - In other instances, especially when some hypothesis  belonging  half  to  physics  and  half  to  morals  had  cast  gloom  over someone's spirits, he refrained from refuting this hypothesis and admitted it might well be true: but he added that there was yet another hypothesis to explain  the  same  phenomenon;  perhaps  this  second  hypothesis represented the truth. A multiplicity of hypotheses, for example as to the
origin of the bad conscience, suffices still in our own time to lift from the
soul that  shadow  that so easily arises  from a laborious pondering over a
single  hypothesis  which,  being  the  only  one  visible,  is  a  hundredfold
overrated. - Thus he who wishes to offer consolation - to the unfortunate,
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S  S H A D O W
ill-doers, hypochondriacs, the dying - should call to mind the two pacifying  formulae  of  Epicurus,  which  are  capable  of being  applied  to  very many  questions.  Reduced  to  their  simplest  form  they  would  perhaps
become: firstly, if that is how things are they do not concern us; secondly,
things may be thus but they may also be otherwise.
In the night. - As soon as night falls our perception of the most immediate
things changes. The wind goes along as though on forbidden pathways,
whispering as  though  seeking something,  ill-humoured because it does
not find it. The lamplight shines with a dull ruddy glow, gazing wearily,
unwillingly  struggling against  the  night,  an  impatient  slave  of wakeful
man.  The sleeper lies breathing fitfully,  a shuddery beat to which everrecurring care seems to play the melody - we cannot hear it, but when the sleeper's breast rises we feel our heart tighten, and when his breath sinks
down and almost dies away into deathly silence we say to ourself 'rest,
rest, poor perturbed spirit!' - we desire for all that lives, because it lives so
oppressed, an eternal rest; night lures us over to death. - If men had to do
without the  sun,  and waged war against the  night with moonlight and
oil,  what philosophy would envelop  them  in its  veil!  One  can  see  only
too  well,  as  things  are,  how  the  darkness  and  deprivation  of sun  that
enshrouds  half his  life  has  rendered  the  spiritual and  psychical  nature
of man on the whole dark and gloomy.
Where the theory of freedom of will originated. - Over one man necessity stands
in  the  shape  of  his  passions,  over another  as  the  habit  of hearing  and
obeying, over a third as a logical conscience, over a fourth as caprice and a
mischievous pleasure  in escapades.  These  four will,  however,  seek the
freedom of their will precisely where each of them is most firmly fettered: it
is as if the silkworm sought the freedom of its will in spinning.  How does
this happen? Evidently because each considers himself most free where
his feeling of living is greatest; thus, as we have said, in passion, in duty, in
knowledge, in mischievousness respectively.  That through which the individual human being is  strong,  wherein  he feels  himself  animated,  he involuntarily thinks must also always be the  element of his freedom: he
accounts  dependence  and  dullness,  independence  and  the  feeling  of
living as necessarily coupled. - Here an experience in the social-political
domain has been falsely transferred to the farthest metaphysical domain:
in the former the strong man is also the free man; the lively feeling of joy
and sorrow, high hope, boldness in desire, powerfulness in hatred is the
property of the rulers and the independent, while the subjected man, the
slave,  lives  dull  and  oppressed.  - The  theory  of freedom  of will  is  an
invention of ruling classes.
Feeling no new chains. - So long as we do not feel that we are dependent on
anything  we  regard  ourselves  as  independent:  a  false  conclusion  that
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
demonstrates  how  proud  and  lusting  for  power  man  is.  For  he here
assumes  that  as  soon  as  he  experiences  dependence  he  must  under  all
circumstances notice and recognize it,  under the presupposition that he is
accustomed to living in independence and  if,  exceptionally,  he  lost it,  he
would  at  once  perceive  a  sensation  antithetical  to  the  one  he  is accustomed to. - But what if the opposite were true: that he is always living in manifold  dependence but  regards  himself as free when,  out of long  habituation,  he  no longer perceives the weight of the chains? It is only from new chains  that  he now suffers: - 'freedom of will'  really means  nothing
more than feeling no new chains.
1 1
Freedom of will and isolation of facts. - Our usual imprecise mode o f  observation takes a group of phenomena as one and calls it a fact: between this fact  and  another  fact  it imagines  in addition  an  empty  space,  it isolates
every fact.  In reality,  however,  all  our  doing  and  knowing  is  not  a succession  of facts and  empty  spaces  but a  continuous  flux.  Now,  belief in freedom of will is  incompatible  precisely with the idea of a  continuous,
homogeneous,  undivided,  indivisible flowing:  it presupposes  that every
individual action  is  isolate and indivisible; it  is  an  atomism in  the  domain of
willing  and  knowing.  - Just  as  we  understand  characters  only  imprecisely, so do we also facts: we speak of identical characters,  identical facts: neither exists. Now, we praise and censure, however, only under this false
presupposition that there are identical facts,  that there exists a graduated
order  of classes  of facts  which  corresponds  to  a  graduated  world-order:
thus we isolate, not only the individual fact, but also again groups of supposedly identical facts (good,  evil,  sympathetic,  envious actions, etc.) - in both  cases  erroneously. - The word and the concept are the most manifest ground for our belief in this isolation of groups of actions:  we do not only designate  things  with  them,  we  think  originally  that through them
we grasp the true in things. Through words and concepts we are still continually misled into imagining things as being simpler than they are, separate  from  one  another,  indivisible,  each  existing  in  and  for  itself.  A philosophical  mythology  lies  concealed  in  language  which  breaks  out
again  every  moment,  however careful  one  may be  otherwise.  Belief in
freedom of will - that is to say in identical facts and in isolated facts - has in
language its constant evangelist and advocate.
The fundamental errors. - For man to feel any sort of psychical pleasure or
displeasure he must be in the grip of one of these  two illusions: either he
believes in the identity of certain facts, certain sensations: in which case he
experiences  psychical  pleasure  or  displeasure  through  comparing  his
present states with past ones and declaring them identical or not identical
(as  happens  in  all  recollection);  or  he  believes  in  freedom  of will,  for
instance when he thinks  'I did not have to do this',  'this could have happened  differently',  and  likewise  gains pleasure or displeasure.  Without the errors which are active in every psychical pleasure and displeasure a
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
humanity would  never have come into existence - whose  fundamental
feeling is and remains that man is the free being in a world of unfreedom,
the  eternal  miracle worker  whether  he  does  good  or ill,  the  astonishing
exception, the superbeast and almost-god, the meaning of creation which
cannot be  thought  away,  the  solution  of the  cosmic  riddle,  the  mighty
ruler over nature and the despiser of it, the creature which calls its history
world history! - Vanitas vanitatum homo.*
Saying a thing  twice.  - It  is  good  to repeat oneself and  thus bestow on a
thing a right and a left  foot.  Truth may be able  to  stand on one leg;  but
with two it can walk and get around.
Man, the comedian of the world. - Let us hope there really are more spiritual
beings than men are, so that all the humour shall not go to waste that lies
in the fact that man regards himself as the goal and purpose of the existence of the whole universe and that mankind will not seriously rest satisfied  with  itself  as  anything  less  than  the  accomplisher  of  a  universal mission. If a god created the world then he created men as the apes of god,
so as always to have  on hand  something to cheer  him  up in his all-tooprotracted eternities.  The  music of the  spheres encompassing the earth would  then  no  doubt  be  the  mocking  laughter  of  all  other  creatures
encompassing  man.  That  bored  immortal  tickles  his  favourite  animal
with pain, so as to take pleasure in the proud and tragic way this vainest
of all creatures displays and interprets his sufferings and in his spiritual
inventiveness in general - as  the  inventor of this inventor.  For he who
devised  man  for his  amusement  possessed  more  spirit  than  man,  and
more enjoyment of spirit. Yet even here, where we are for once willing to
see  our humanity humiliated,  our vanity is playing a  trick on  us,  inasmuch as we men would like to be something quite incomparable and miraculous at least in possessing this vanity.  Our uniqueness in the universe!
alas,  it is all too improbable an idea!  The astronomers,  to whom there is
sometimes  given  a  horizon  that  really  is  free of  the  earth,  give  us  to
understand that the drop of life in the universe is without significance for
the  total  character  of  the  tremendous  ocean  of  becoming  and  passing
away: that uncounted stars possess similar conditions for the production
of life as the earth does - very many thus do, though they constitute only
a  handful  compared  with  the  limitless  number  which  have  never
experienced the eruption of life or have long since recovered from it; that
measured against the duration of their existence life on each of these stars
has been a  moment,  a  sudden  flickering  up,  with  long,  long  spaces  of
time afterwards - and thus in no sense the goal and ultimate objective of
their existence.  Perhaps the ant in the forest imagines it is the goal and
objective of the forest just as firmly as we do when in our imagination we
almost  involuntarily  associate  the  destruction  of  mankind  with  the
destruction of the earth:  indeed,  we are being modest if we halt at that
•  Vanitas vanitatum homo: man is the vanity of vanities
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
and do not organize a general twilight of the gods and the universe for
the funeral rites of the last man.  Even the most unprejudiced astronomer
himself can hardly imagine  the earth without life other than as the luminous and floating grave-mound of mankind.
1 5
Modesty of man. - How little pleasure most people need to make them find
life good,  how modest man is!
Where indifference is needed. - Nothing could be more wrongheaded than
to want to wait and see what science will one day determine once and for
all concerning the first and  last  things and  until  then continue  to  think
(and  especially  to believe!) in the customary fashion - as we are so often
advised to do.  The impulse to desire in this domain nothing but certainties
is a religious after-shoot, no more - a hidden and only apparently sceptical
species of the  'metaphysical need',  coupled  with  the  consideration  that
there is no prospect of these ultimate certainties being to hand for a long
time  to come and that  until  then the  'believer'  is right not to trouble his
head about anything in this domain. We have absolutely no need of these
certainties  regarding  the  furthest  horizon  to  live  a  full  and  excellent
human life: just as the ant has no need of them to be a good ant.  What we
need,  rather,  is  to  become  clear  in  our  minds  as  to  the  origin  of  that
calamitous weightiness we have for so long accorded these things,  and for
that we  require a history of  the  ethical and  religious sensations.  For  it  is
only  under  the  influence  of  these  sensations  that  those  finest  of  all
questions  of  knowledge  have  acquired  for  us  such  consequence  and
dreadfulness:  into  the  outermost  regions  to  which  the  spiritual  eye  is
strained but into which it is unable to  penetrate we  have displaced such
concepts  as  guilt  and  punishment  (and  everlasting  punishment  moreover!): and this the more incautiously the darker these regions have been.
Where we could establish nothing for a certainty it has been our practice
from  of  old  boldly  to  fantasize,  and  we  have  persuaded  our  posterity
to take these fantasies  seriously and for truth, when all else has failed by
resorting  to  the  detestable  assertion  that  faith  is  worth  more  than
knowledge.  What  is  now  needed  in  regard  to  these  last  things  is  not
knowledge against faith but indifference against faith and supposed knowledge
in  those domains! - Everything else must be  of  more concern  to  us  than
that which has hitherto been preached to us as the most important of all
things - I mean the questions:  what is the purpose of man? What is his
fate after death? How can he be reconciled with God? - and all the rest of
these curiosa. Just as little as with these questions of the religious are we
concerned  with  the  questions of the  philosophical dogmatists,  whether
they be idealists or materialists or realists. Their object, one and all, is to
compel us to a decision in domains where neither faith nor knowledge is
needed;  it is more  useful,  even  for  the greatest lovers of knowledge,  if
around  everything  accessible  to  reason  and  investigation  there  lies  a
misty  and deceptive  girdle of quagmire,  a band of the impenetrable, in-
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S  S H A D O W
definable,  and eternally fluid. It is precisely through the contrast it presents to the realm of darkness at the edge of the world of knowledge that the bright world  of  knowledge  close  to  us  is  continually  enhanced  in
value.  - We  must again become good  neighbours  to  the closest  things and
cease from gazing so contemptuously past them at clouds and monsters
of the night.  In forests and caves,  in swampy regions and under cloudy
skies - this is where man has lived all too long, and lived poorly, as on the
cultural steps of whole millennia. There he has learned to despise the present and neighbourhood and life and himself - and we, who dwell in the brighter fields of nature and the spirit, we too have inherited in our blood
something of this poison of contempt for what is closest.
Deep explanations. - He who explains a passage in an author 'more deeply'
than  the passage was  meant  has  not explained  the  author but obscured
him. This is how our metaphysicians stand in regard to the text of nature;
indeed,  they stand much worse.  For in order to  apply their deep explanations they frequently first adjust the text in a way that will facilitate it: in other words, they spoil it.  As a curious example of the spoiling of a text
and  the  obscuring  of  its  author  let  us  here  consider  Schopenhauer's
thoughts on  the pregnancy of women.  The  sign of the continued existence in time of the will to live is, he says,  coitus; the sign that there has again been allied to  this will the possibility of redemption held open by
the light of knowledge,  and knowledge indeed of the highest degree of
clarity,  is  the  renewed  incarnation  of the  will  to  live.  The mark of this
latter  is  pregnancy,  which  thus  goes  about  freely  and  openly,  indeed
proudly, while coitus crawls away and hides like a criminal.  He asserts
that every woman if surprised in the act of procreation would like to die of
shame, but 'displays her pregnancy without a trace of shame, indeed with a kind
of pride'.  The  first  thing to  remark is that this condition could hardly be
displayed  more  than  it  displays  itself;  but  inasmuch  as  Schopenhauer
emphasizes only the intentionality of this displaying he is preparing the
text for himself so as to harmonize it with the 'explanation' he is about to
bring forward. Then we must add that what he says as to the universality
of  the  phenomenon  to  be  explained  is  untrue:  he  speaks  of  'every
woman': but many, especially younger women, often evidence a painful
embarrassment,  even  before  their  closest  relations,  when  in  this  condition; and if women of more mature or the maturest years, in particular those of the lower orders,  do in fact pride themselves on being in such a
condition,  then it is no doubt because it provides evidence that they are
still desired by their men. That at the sight of it her neighbour or his wife
or a  passing  stranger  should  say or think:  'can  it be  possible - ':  female
vanity is,  at a low level of intelligence, always happy to receive this alms.
On the other hand,  it would have to  follow  from  Schopenhauer's propositions  that precisely  the  cleverest and  most  intelligent women would openly rejoice the most at their condition: for they have the greatest prospect of bearing a prodigy of intellect in whom 'the will' can, to the general
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
wellbeing,  again  'deny'  itself;  stupid  women,  on the  contrary,  would
have every  reason  to conceal  their  pregnancy more bashfully than anything else  they conceal.  It  cannot be  said  that these  things derive  from reality.  Supposing,  however,  that  Schopenhauer were in a quite  general
sense  right  to  say  that  in a  condition  of pregnancy  women  evidence  a
greater self-contentment than they otherwise do,  there is an explanation
lying closer to hand than his does. One can imagine a hen cackling before
she has laid an  egg,  the content of  the cackling being:  'Look! Look! I am
going to lay an egg! I am going to lay an egg!'
The modern Oiogenes. - Before one seeks men one must have found the lantern.  Will it have to be the lantern of the cynic?
Immoralists. - Because they  dissect morality,  moralists  must now be content to be upbraided as immoralists.  But he who wants to dissect has to kill; yet only for the sake of better knowledge,  better judgement,  better living;  not  so that all  the world shall start dissecting.  Unhappily,  however, people still believe that every moralist has to be a model and ideal in all he
does  and  that others are supposed to imitate him: they confuse him with
the  preacher  of  morals.  The  older  moralists  dissected  too  little  and
preached  too much: which is why the moralists of today experience this
confusion and its unpleasant consequences.
Not  to  be  confused.
Moralists  who  treat  the  grandiose,  mighty,  self
-
sacrificing disposition  such  as is evidenced by  Plutarch's  heroes,  or the
pure,  enlightened,  heat-conducting  state  of soul  of truly good men and
women, as weighty problems and seek to discover their origin by exhibiting the complexity in the apparent  simplicity and directing the eye to the interlacing of motives,  to the  delicate  conceptual  illusions woven into it,
and to the individual and groups of sensations inherited from of old and
slowly intensified - these moralists are most different from precisely those
moralists with  whom  they are most confused: from the trivial spirits who
have no belief at all in these dispositions and states  of soul and suppose
that  greatness and  purity  are only an  outward  show  concealing behind
them a paltriness similar to their own. The moralists say:  'here there are
problems', and  these  wretches  say:  'here  there are deceivers and deceptions';  they  thus  deny  the  existence  of  that  which  the  former  are  intent upon explaining.
Man as the measurer. - Perhaps all the morality of mankind has its origin in
the  tremendous  inner  excitement  which  seized  on  primeval men when
they discovered measure and measuring,  scales and weighing (the word
'Mensch', indeed,  means  the  measurer,  he desired to name  himself after
his greatest discovery!). With these conceptions they climbed into realms
)10
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S  S H A D O W
that are quite unmeasurable and unweighable but originally did not seem
to be.
Principle of equilibrium. - The brigand and the man of power who promises
to defend a community against the brigand are probably at bottom very
similar beings, except that the latter obtains what he wants in a different
way from the former: namely through regular tributes paid to him by the
community and  not by  imposts levied by force.  (It is the same relationship as that between merchant and pirate,  who are  for a long time one and the same person: where one function does not seem to him advisable
he  practises  the  other.  Even now,  indeed,  merchant's  morality is really
only a more prudent form of pirate's morality: to buy as cheap as possible where possible for no more than the operational costs - to sell as dear as possible). The essential thing is: this man of power promises to maintain
an equilibrium with the brigand; in this the weaker perceive a possibility of
living.  For  they  must either  combine  together  to  produce  an  equivalent
power  or  subject  themselves  to  one  already  possessing  this  equivalent
power  (perform  services  for  him  in  exchange  for  his  protection).  The
latter proceeding is easily  the  preferred one,  because at bottom it holds
two dangerous beings  in check:  the  former through the latter,  the latter
through considerations of advantage;  for the latter derives benefit from
treating  the  subject  community  with  kindness  or restraint  so  that  they
may feed not only themselves but their master too.  In reality the people
can still have a hard enough time of it even under this arrangement, but
when they compare it with the perpetual possibility of complete destruction that preceded it they find even this condition endurable. - The community is originally the organization of the weak for the production of an equilibrium with powers that threaten it with danger.  An organization to
produce preponderance would be more advisable if the community could
thereby become strong enough to destroy the threatening power once and
for all: and if it were a matter of a single powerful depredator this would
certainly be attempted. If, however, he is the head of a clan or has a large
following  his  speedy and decisive destruction  is unlikely to be  accomplished and what is to be expected is a long-drawn-out feud: but this state of  things  is  the  least  desirable  one  for  the  community,  since  it  must
deprive them of the time they need for the provision of their subsistence
with the regularity it requires and be attended by the ever-present threat
that they will be deprived of all the products of their labours. That is why
the community prefers to bring its power of defence and attack up to precisely  the  point at  which  the  power possessed  by  its  dangerous  neighbour stands and then to give him to  understand  that the scales are now evenly  balanced:  why,  in  that  event,  should  they  not  be  good  friends
with one another? - Equilibrium is thus a very important concept for the
oldest  theory  of  law  and  morality;  equilibrium  is  the  basis  of justice.
When in ruder ages justice says: 'An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth', it
presupposes that equilibrium has been attained and  seeks through this
31 1
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
retribution to preserve it: so that when one man now transgresses against
another, the other no -longer takes on him the revenge of blind animosity.
On  the  contrary,  by  virtue  of  the  jus  talionis*  the  equilibrium  of  the
disturbed power relationship is restored: for in such primeval conditions
one eye, one arm more is one piece of power more, one weight more in the
scales.  - Within a  community  in  which  all  regard  themselves  as  equivalent there  exist disgrace and punishment as  measures  against  transgressions,  that  is  to  say  against  disruptions  of  the  principle  of equilibrium: disgrace  as a  weight  placed  in  the  scales  against  the  encroaching  individual  who has procured  advantages  for  himself through his encroachment and now through the disgrace he incurs experiences disadvantages which  abolish  these  earlier  advantages  and  outweigh  them.  The  same
applies to punishment: against  the preponderance which every criminal
promises  himself  it  imposes  a  far  greater  counter-weight,  enforced
imprisonment for acts of violence, restitution and punitive fines for theft.
In  this  way  the  transgressor  is reminded  that  through  his  act  he  has excluded  himself  from  the  community  and  its  moral  advantages:  the  community  treats  him  as  one  who  is  not  equivalent,  as  one  of  the  weak standing outside  it;  that  is  why  punishment is not  only  retribution  but
contains something more, something of the harshness of the state of nature; it
is precisely this  that  it wants to recall.
Have the adherents of the theory of free-will the right to punish?  People who
-
judge and punish as a profession try to establish in each case whether an
ill-doer is at all accountable for his deed, whether he was able to employ
his  intelligence,  whether he  acted  for  reasons  and  not  unconsciously  or
under compulsion. If he is punished, he is punished for having preferred
the  �orse  reasons  to  the  better:  which  he  must  therefore  have  known.
Where  this  knowledge  is  lacking  a  man  is,  according  to  the  prevailing
view,  unfree  and  not  responsible:  except  if  his  lack  of knowledge,  his
ignorantia legist for example,  is a result of an intentional neglect to learn;
in  which  case,  when  he  failed  to learn what he  should  have  learned  he
had  already  preferred  the  worse  reasons  to  the  better  and  must  now
suffer the consequences of his bad choice.  If,  on  the other hand,  he did
not see the better reasons,  perhaps from  dull-wittedness  or weakness of
mind,  it is not usual  to punish  him:  he lacked,  one says,  the capacity to
choose, he acted as an animal would. For an offence to be punishable presupposes  that  its  perpetrator  intentionally  acted  contrary  to  the  better dictates of his intelligence.  But how can anyone intentionally be less intelligent than he has to be? Whence comes the decision when the scales are weighted  with  good  and  bad  motives?  Not  from  error,  from blindness,
not from an external nor from an internal compulsion? (Consider, moreover,  that every so-called 'external compulsion' is nothing more than the internal  compulsion  of  fear  and  pain.)  Whence?  one  asks  again  and
•  jus talionis: right of retribution
t  ignorantia legis: ignorance of the law
)12
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
again. The intelligence is not the cause, because it could not decide against
the better reasons?  And  here  one calls  'free-will' to one's aid:  it is pure
wilfulness which is  supposed to decide,  an impulse is  supposed to enter
within  which  motive  plays  no  part,  in  which  the  deed,  arising  out  of
nothing, occurs  as  a miracle.  It is  this supposed wilfulness,  in  a case in
which wilfulness ought not to reign, which is punished: the rational intelligence, which knows law, prohibition and command, ought to have permitted no choice,  and to have had the effect of compulsion and a higher power.  Thus  the  offender is  punished  because  he  employs  'free-will',
that is to say, because he acted without a reason where he ought to have
acted in accordance with reasons.  Why did he do this? But it is precisely
this question that can no longer even be asked: it was a deed without a 'for
that reason', without motive, without origin, something purposeless and
non-rational.  - But such a deed too ought, in accordance with the first condition of all punishability laid down above, not to be punished! It is not as if something had not been  done here,  something omitted,  the intelligence
had not been employed: for the omission is under all circumstances unintentional! and only the intentional omission to perform what the law commands counts as punishable.  The offender certainly preferred the worse reasons to the better, but without reason or intention: he certainly failed to
employ his intelligence,  but not for  the purpose of not employing it.  The
presupposition that for an offence to be punishable its perpetrator must
have intentionally acted contrary  to his intelligence - it is precisely this
presupposition which is  annulled by  the assumption of 'free-will' .  You
adherents  of the theory of  'free-will'  have  no right  to wnish,  your own
principles deny you  that right! - But these  are  at bottom nothing but a
very peculiar conceptual mythology;  and  the hen that hatched it sat on
her eggs in a place far removed from reality.
Towards an assessment of the criminal and his judge. - The criminal,  who is
aware of all the circumstances attending his case, fails to find his deed as
extraordinary and incomprehensible as his judges and censurers do; his
punishment,  however,  is  meted  out  in  accordance  with  precisely  the
degree of astonishment the latter feel when they regard the incomprehensible  nature  of  his  deed.  - If  the  knowledge  the  criminal's  defending counsel possesses of the case and its antecedents is sufficiently extensive,
then  the  so-called  extenuating  circumstances  he  presents  one  by  one
must end by extenuating away his client's entire guilt.  Or,  more clearly:
the defending counsel will step by step ameliorate that astonishment which
condemns his client and metes out his punishment, and finally expunge
it altogether, by  compelling every honest auditor to confess to  himself:
'he had to act as he did; if we were to punish, what we would be punishing would be eternal necessity'. - To determine the degree of punishment according to the degree of knowledge one possesses, or can in any way acquire,
of the history of a crime - does this not conflict with every idea of fairness?
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O  H U M A N
A fair exchange. - An exchange is honest and just only when each of those
participating  demands  as  much  as  his own  object  seems worth to him,
including the effort it cost to acquire it, its rarity, the time expended, etc.,
together with its sentimental value. As soon as he sets the price with reference  to  the  need of the other  he  is  a  subtler  brigand  and  extortioner.  - If money is the exchange object it must be considered that a shilling in the
hand of a rich heir,  a day-labourer, a shop-keeper, a student are quite different things: according to whether he did almost nothing or a great deal to get  it,  each  ought  to  receive  little or a great  deal in exchange  for  it: in
reality it is,  of course, the other way round. In the great world of money
the  shilling of the laziest rich man is more lucrative than that of the poor
and  industrious.
Rule of law as a means. - Law, reposing on compacts between equals, continues to exist for so long as the power of those who have concluded these compacts remains equal or similar; prudence created law to put an end to
feuding  and  to  useless  squandering  between  forces  of  similar  strength.
But just as definitive an end is put to them if one party has become decisively
weaker  than  the  other:  then  subjection  enters  in  and  law ceases,  but  the
consequence is the  same as that previously  attained  through the rule of
law. For now it is the prudence of the dominant party which advises that
the  strength  of  the  subjected  should  be  economized  and  not  uselessly
squandered: and often the subjected  find themselves  in more favourable
circumstances than they did when they were equals. - The rule of law is
thus a temporary means advised by prudence,  not an end.
Explanation of Schadenfreude. - Schadenfreude originates in the fact that,  in
certain  respects  of  which  he  is  well  aware,  everyone  feels  unwell,  is
oppressed by care or envy or sorrmy: the  harm  that befalls another makes
him  our equal,  it appeases our envy. - If,  on the other hand, he happens
to feel perfectly  well,  he nonetheless gathers up his neighbour's misfortune in his consciousness as a capital upon which  to draw when he himself  faces  misfortune:  thus  he  too  experiences  'Schadenfreude'.  The disposition bent  upon equality thus extends its demands to the domain of
happiness and chance as well: Schadenfreude is the commonest expression
of the  victory  and  restoration of equality  within  the  higher world-order
too.  It is only since man has learned to see in other men beings like and
equal to himself, that is to say only since the establishment of society, that
Schadenfreude has existed.
Capricio11Sness in the apportionment of punishment. - Most criminals acquire
punishment  in  the  way  women  acquire  children.  They  have  done  the
same thing hundreds of times without noticing any ill consequences: suddenly  there  is  a  disclosure,  and  at  its  heels  punishment.  Habituation, however,  ought  to  make the  guiltiness  of the  deed on  account of which
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
the criminal is punished seem less culpable: for it happened as the result
of a tendency the criminal has acquired and which he would have found
it hard to  resist.  Instead of that,  a  suspicion of habitual crime  procures
him severer punishment;  habituation is seen as a ground for refusing any
amelioration  of  his  sentence.  A  previously  exemplary  life  in  contrast
with which the crime stands out all the more fearsomely ought to make its
guiltiness seem all the greater! But its customary effect is to ameliorate the
punishment.  Thus everything is meted out,  not with an eye to the criminal, but with an eye to society and the harm and danger it has incurred: the previous serviceability of a man is weighed against his single harmful
act, his previous harmfulness added to that at present disclosed and his
punishment  intensified accordingly.  But if one  in  this  way  punishes  or
rewards  a  man's  past  as well  (in  the  case of a  serviceable  past  a  lighter
punishment is a reward),  one ought to go back even further and reward
or punish the causes of such or such a past,  I mean parents,  educators,
society,  etc.: in  many cases the judges will  then be  found  to  be  in some
way involved in the guilt. It is capricious to halt at the criminal if what one
is punishing is the past: if one is not willing to accede to the absolute guiltlessness of all guilt,  one  should at least halt at each  individual  case and look no further back: that is to say,  isolate the guilt and refrain from connecting  it  in  any  way  with  the  past  - otherwise  one  will  come  to  sin against logic. Draw the necessary conclusion from your doctrine of 'freedom of the  will',  you  free-willers,  and boldly decree:  'no deed possesses a past'.
Envy and its nobler brother. - Where equality really has prevailed and been
permanently established there arises that tendency which is on the whole
accounted  immoral and can  hardly be  conceived of in a  state  of nature:
envy. The envious man is conscious of every respect in which the man he
envies exceeds the common measure and desires to push him down to it or to raise  himself up to the height of the other:  out of which there arise two  different  modes of action which  Hesiod  designated  as  the  evil  and
the good Eris.  There likewise arises in a state of equality a sense of indignation  that  one  man  should  fare  badly  beneath  his  dignity  and  equal rights, while another fares well above his equal rights: these affects are felt
by  nobler natures.  They  suffer from  the absence of justice and equity in
those things that are independent of the despotism of man: that is to say,
they demand  that  that  equality  recognized  by  man  shall  now  also  be
recognized by nature and chance; it angers them that the equal are not accorded an equal fate.
Envy of the gods. - The 'envy of the gods' arises when he who is accounted
lower equates himself with him who is accounted higher (as Ajax does) or
who is made equal to him by the favour of fortune (as Niobe is as a mother
too abundantly blessed). Within the social order of rank this envy imposes
the demand that no one shall enjoy rewards that exceed his station,  and
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
that his happiness too shall accord with his station, and especially that his
self-conceit shall not grow beyond these bounds. The victorious general
often experiences the 'envy of the gods', as does the pupil who produces
a masterly piece of work.
Vanity as an offshoot of the antisocial.  For the sake of their security,  men
-
have  founded  the  community  on  the  basis  of  positing  themselves  as
being equal to one another; but this conception is at bottom repugnant to
the  nature of the individual and  something imposed upon  him;  and so it
happens that,  the more  the  general  security  is guaranteed,  the more do
new shoots of the ancient  drive to  domination assert  themselves:  in the
division of classes, in the claim to special dignities and privileges,  and in
vanity  in  general  (in  mannerisms,  costume,  modes  of  speech,  etc.).
As soon  as  the  communality  comes  to feel  itself in danger  again,  the
majority,  who  were  unable  to  assert  their  domination  when  a  state  of
general  calm  obtained,  reimpose  a  condition  of  equality:  the  absurd
special privileges and vanities disappear for a time. If,  however,  the communality  collapses  completely  and  everything  dissolves  into  anarchy, then there at once breaks through that condition of unreflecting, ruthless
inequality that constitutes  the state of nature:  as, according to the report
of  Thucydides,  happened  on  Corcyra.*  There  exists  neither  a  natural
right nor a natural wrong.
Fairness.  A  further  development  of  justice  is  fairness,  arising  among
-
those who do not offend against the community's principle of equality: to
cases  upon  which  the  law  does  not  touch  there  is  applied  that  subtler
regard for equilibrium which looks before and behind and whose motto is
'as  thou  to  me,  so I to  thee'. Aequumt means  precisely  'it is in conformity
with  our  equality;  this  ameliorates  our  little  differences  too  down  to  an
appearance of equality and desires that we overlook many things we do
not have to'.
Elements of revenge. - The word 'revenge' is said so quickly it almost seems
as if it could contain no more than one conceptual and perceptional root.
And so one continues to strive to discover it: just as our economists have
not  yet  wearied  of  scenting  a  similar  unity  in  the  word  'value'  and  of
searching  after  the  original  root-concept  of the  word.  As if every  word
were  not a  pocket  into  which  now  this,  now  that,  now several  things at
once  have  been  put!  Thus  'revenge',  too,  is  now  this,  now  that,  now
something more combined .  Distinguish  first of all that  defensive  return
blow which one delivers even against lifeless  objects (moving machinery,
for example) which have hurt us: the sense of our counter-action is to put
a stop to the injury by putting a stop to the machine. To achieve this the
•  Corcyra:  the most northern of the Ionian islands, suffered from savage civil war in the fifth
century  BC
t  Aequum: equitable
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
violence of the counter-blow sometimes has to be so great as to shatter the
machine; if, however, it is in fact too strong to be instantly destroyed by a
single individual,  the latter will nonetheless still deliver the  most  vigorous blow of which he is capable - as a  last-ditch  effort,  so to speak.  One behaves in a similar way towards people who have harmed us when we
feel the injury directly; if one wants to call this an act of revenge,  all well
and good; only let it be considered that self-preservation alone  has here set
its clockwork of reason in motion,  and  that  one has  fundamentally been
thinking, not of the person who caused the injury, but only of oneself: we
act  thus  without wanting  to  do  harm  in return,  but only  so as to get out
with life and limb. - One needs time if one is to transfer one's thoughts
from oneself to one's opponent and  to ask oneself how he can be hit at
most grievously.  This happens in the second species of revenge: its presupposition is a reflection over the other's vulnerability and capacity for suffering:  one wants  to hurt.  To secure himself against further harm is
here  so far from the mind of the revenger that he almost always brings
further harm upon himself and very often cold-bloodedly anticipates it. If
in  the case  of the first species  of revenge  it was fear of a  second blow
which  made  the  counter-blow  as  vigorous  as  possible,  here  there  is
almost complete indifference to what the opponent will do; the vigour of
the counter-blow  is  determined  only  by  that which  he has done to  us.
What, then, has he done? And of what use is it to us if our opponent now
suffers after we have suffered through him? It is a question of restitution:
while  the act of revenge of the first species serves only self-preservation.
Perhaps we lost property, rank, friends, children through our opponent
- these losses are not made good by revenge, the restitution applies only
to an attendant loss occasioned by the other losses referred to. Restitutiona! revenge does not protect one from further harm, it does not make good the harm one has suffered - except in one case. If our honour has suffered
through our opponent  revenge is capable of restoring it.  But our honour
has suffered harm in every case in which someone has done us a deliberate  injury:  for our opponent proved  thereby  that he  did  not fear us.  By revenging ourself on him we prove that we do not fear him either: it is in
this that the compensation,  the restitution lies. (The objective of demonstrating the complete absence of fear goes so far in the case of some people that the danger to themselves involved in the revenge - loss of health or
life or other deprivations - counts as an indispensable condition of the
revenge.  That is why  they choose the  path  of the  duel even when  the
courts offer them a means of acquiring compensation for the offence they
have sustained:  they refuse to regard as sufficient a restitution of their
honour that involves no risk because it cannot serve to demonstrate their
lack  of fear.) - In  the  first  species  of revenge  it is  precisely  fear  which
directs the counter-blow:  here,  on the contrary,  it is the absence of fear
which,  as  stated,  wants  to prove itself through the counter-blow. - Nothing,  therefore,  could  appear  more  different  than  the  inner  motives  of these  two  modes  of  action  which  are  called  by  the  common  word
'revenge': and yet it very often happens that the revenger is unclear as to
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
what has really determined his action; perhaps he delivered the counterblow out of fear and to preserve himself but afterwards,  when he has had time to reflect on the motive of wounded honour,  convinces himself he
has  exacted  revenge  on account of his  honour: - this motive is,  after all,
nobler than the other.  An essential element in this is whether he sees his
honour as having been injured in the eyes of others (the world) or only in
the  eyes  of him  who  injured  it:  in  the  latter  case  he  will  prefer secret
revenge,  in the former public.  His revenge will be the more incensed or
the  more  moderate according to how deeply or  weakly  he can  think  his
way into the soul of the perpetrator and the witnesses of his injury; if he
is wholly lacking in this kind of imagination he will not think of revenge
at  all,  since  the  feeling of 'honour'  will  not be present in him and  thus
cannot  be wounded.  He  will  likewise not think  of revenge if he despises
the  perpetrator and  the  witnesses:  because,  as  people he despises,  they
cannot accord him any honour and consequently cannot take any honour
from him  either.  Finally,  he will  refrain from revenge in the not uncommon  case  that  he  loves  the  perpetrator:  he will  thus  lose  honour in  the perpetrator's  eyes,  to  be  sure,  and  will  perhaps become  less  worthy  of
being loved in return.  But to renounce even all claim to love in return is a
sacrifice which love is prepared to make if only it does not have to hurt the
beloved  being:  this  would mean  hurting  oneself more than any sacrifice
hurts.  - Thus:  everyone  will  revenge  himself,  except  if  he  is  without
honour or full of contempt or full of love for the person who has harmed
and  offended  him.  Even when he turns  to the courts he desires revenge
as  a  private  person:  additionally,  however,  as  a  forethoughtful  man  of
society,  he desires  the revenge of society on one who does not honour it.
Through  judicial  punishment,  private  honour as well as  the  honour of
society is thus restored: that is to say - punishment is revenge. - Undoubtedly there is also in it those other elements of revenge already described, insofar as through punishment society serves its own self-preservation and
delivers a  counter-blow  in self-defence.  Punishment serves to prevent further injury,  it wishes to deter. Two such various elements of revenge are thus actually united in punishment,  and the main effect of this may be to
sustain the confusion of concepts referred to by virtue of which the individual who takes revenge usually does not know what he really wants.
The virtues that incur loss. - As members of society we believe we ought not
to practise certain  virtues from  which  as  private  persons  we acquire the
highest  honour  and  a  certain  satisfaction,  for  example  mercy  and  consideration for transgressors of all  kinds - in general any action by which the  interests  of  society  would  suffer  through  our  virtue.  No  bench  of
judges  may conscientiously practise mercy:  this privilege is reserved  to
the  king as an  individual;  one  rejoices when he  makes  use  of it,  as proof
that  one  would  like  to be  merciful,  even  though  as a  society  one absolutely  cannot  be.  Society  thus  recognizes  only  those  virtues  that  are advantageous,  or  at  least  not  harmful  to  it  (those  that  can  be  practised 318
THE  W A N D E RE R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
without its incurring loss,  for example justice).  Those virtues that incur
loss cannot,  consequently,  have come into existence within society,  since
even now there is opposition to them within every society, however circumscribed. They are thus virtues belonging among non-equals, devised by  the superior, the individual;  they are the virtues of rulers bearing the
sense: 'I am sufficiently powerful to put up with a palpable loss, this is a
proof of my power' - and are thus virtues related to pride.
Casuistry of advantage. - There would be no casuistry of morality if there
were no casuistry of advantage. The freest and subtlest reason is often inadequate  to choosing between  two things in such  a way  that its choice must necessarily fall on the one offering the greatest advantage.  In such
cases we choose because we have to choose and afterwards suffer from a
kind of seasickness of the feelings.
Becoming a hypocrite. - Every beggar becomes a hypocrite; as does anyone
who makes a profession of displaying a lack, a state of distress (whether 1t
be  of a  personal  or  a public kind).  - The begger does not feel his  lack
nearly as acutely as he must make it felt if he wants to live by begging.
A kind of cult of the passions.  In order to raise  an accusation against the
-
whole nature of the world,  you dismal philosophical blindworms speak
of the terrible character of human passions.  As if wherever there have been
passions there had also been terribleness!  As if this kind of terribleness
was bound to persist in the world! - Through a neglect of the small facts,
through  Jack  of  self-observation  and  observation  of  those  who  are  to
be  brought  up,  it  is  you  yourselves  who  first  allowed  the  passions  to
develop  into  such  monsters  that you are overcome  by  fear  at  the  word
'passion'! It was up to you,  and is up to us,  to take from the passions their
terrible character and thus prevent their becoming devastating torrents. -
One should not inflate one's oversights into eternal fatalities; let us rather
work honestly together on the task of transforming the passions [Leidenschaften] of mankind one and all into joys [Freudenschaften].
Sting of conscience.  - The  sting  of conscience  is,  like  a  snake  stinging  a
stone, a piece of stupidity.
Origin of rights. - Rights can in the first instance be traced back to tradition,
tradition to some agreement. At some time in the past men were mutually
content with the consequences of the agreement they had come to, and at
the  same  time  too  indolent formally to renew  it;  thus  they lived  on as
though it were continually being renewed and, as  forgetfulness spread
its veil over its origin, gradually came to believe they were in possession
of a sacred, immutable state of affairs upon which every generation had to
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
continue  to build.  Tradition  was  now  a  compulsion,  even  when  it  no
longer served  the  purpose for which the  agreement  had  originally been
concluded. - The weak have at all times found here their sure stronghold:
they tend to regard  that single act of agreement,  that single act of grace,
as valid eternally.
Tlze significance of forgetting for tlze moral sensation.  - The  same  actions as
within primitive society appear to have been performed first with a view
to  common  utility  have  been  performed  by  later  generations  for  other
motives:  out  of  fear  of  or  reverence  for  those  who  demanded  and
recommended them,  or out of habit because one had seen them done all
around one from childhood on, or from benevolence because their performance everywhere produced joy and concurring faces, or from vanity because they were  commended.  Such actions,  whose basic motive,  that
of utility, has been forgotten, are then called moral actions: not because, for
instance, they are performed out of those other motives, but because they
are  not  performed  from  any  conscious  reason  of utility. - Where does it
come  from,  this  hatred  of  utility  which  becomes  visible  here,  where  all
praiseworthy behaviour formally excludes behaviour with a view to utility? - It is plain that society,  the hearth of all morality and all eulogy of moral behaviour,  has had to struggle too long and too  hard against the
self-interest  and  self-will  of  the  individual  not  at  last  to  rate  any  other
motive morally higher than utility. Thus it comes to appear that morality
has  not grown out of utility; while  it is originally  social utility, which had
great difficulty in asserting itself against all the individual private utilities
and making itself more highly respected.
The heritage of morality. - In the domain of morality too there is a rich heritage:  it is  possessed  by the  gentle,  the  good-natured,  the sympathizing and  charitable,  who  have  all  inherited  from  their  forefathers  the  good
mode of action but  not  the  reasons  for  it  (its  source).  The  pleasant thing
about  this  wealth  is  that  it has  to  be  continually  expended  and spread
abroad if it is to be felt to exist at all, and that it thus involuntarily works to
reduce the distance between the morally rich and the morally poor: and,
what is best and most remarkable, it does so not for the sake of producing
some future mean and average between poor and rich, but for the sake of
a  universal enrichment and  over-enrichment. - The foregoing is perhaps
an  adequate  summary  of  the  dominant  view  of  what  constitutes  the
moral heritage:  but  it  seems  to  me  that  this view is  maintained  more  in
majorem gloriam* of morality than  out of respect for  truth.  Experience at
least advances a proposition which, if it does not contradict that universal
opinion,  at any rate imposes upon it significant limitations. Without the
most  refined  understanding  (so  says  experience),  without  the  capacity
for  the  most  delicate  choice  and  a  strong  inclination  to  moderation,  the
inheritors of morality  become  squanderers of morality:  by  surrendering
•  in majorem gloriam: to the greater glory
J20
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
themselves  unrestrainedly  to their  sympathetic,  charitable,  reconciliatory,  ameliorating  drives  they  render  all  the  world  around  them  more indolent,  covetous  and  sentimental.  That  is  why  the  children  of  such
highly moral  squanderers  can easily - and,  sad to say,  at best - become
pleasant, feeble good-for-nothings.
The judge and extenuating circumstances. - 'You should play fair even with
the Devil and pay him what you owe him', said an old soldier after they
had  told  him  the  story of Faust in a  little  more  detail.  'Faust belongs  in
Hell!' - 'Oh, you frightful man!' exclaimed his wife.  'How can that be? All
he did was to  have no ink in his inkwell! To  write with blood is a  sin,  I
know,  but is that any reason why such a handsome man should burn?'
Problem of duty towards  truth. - Duty is a compulsive feeling which impels
us to  some  action  and which  we  call good  and regard as undiscussable
(- we  refuse to  speak of its origin,  limitation and justification or to hear
them  spoken of). The  thinker,  however,  regards everything as  having
evolved and  everything  that  has  evolved  as  discussable,  and  is  thus  a
man without a sense of duty - as long,  that is,  as he is functioning as  a
thinker.  As such he will thus fail  to  feel a sense of duty with respect  to
seeing and telling the truth and  will not recognize any such duty; he asks:
whence does it come? what is its purpose? - but these questions  themselves he will regard as questionable.  But is the consequence of this not that the  thinker's machine will no longer work properly if,  in the act of
knowing, he really is able to feel free of a sense of duty? Insofar as here the
element required to heat the machine seems to be the same element as is
to  be  investigated by  means of  the machine.  - The  formula  would perhaps be: assuming there existed a duty to know the truth, in what relation would truth then stand to any other species of duty? - But is a hypothetical sense of duty not a contradiction? -
Stages of morality. - Morality is first of all a means of preserving the com-
munity and warding off its destruction;  then it is a means of preserving
the community at a certain height and in a certain quality of existence.  Its
motive forces are fear and hope: and they are applied  the more severely,
powerfully and  coarsely  the  stronger the  inclination  to perversity,  onesidedness and the purely personal remains.  The most dreadful means of inspiring fear have to be  pressed  into  service  here  for as long as milder
ones fail to  produce any effect and that twofold species of preservation
cannot  be  achieved  in  any  other  way  (one  of the  very  strongest  is  the
invention of a  Beyond with an everlasting  Hell).  Further stages of morality,  and  thus  of  means  of  attaining  the  objectives  described,  are  the commands of a god (such as the Mosaic law); further and higher still the
commands of the concept of unconditional duty with its 'thou shalt' - all
still somewhat coarsely hewn but broad stages and steps, because men do
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
not yet  know how to place  their feet on narrower,  more  delicate  steps.
Then comes a morality of inclination, of taste, finally that of insight- which
is above  and beyond  all illusionary motive  forces  of morality but has  a
clear realization of why for long ages mankind could possess no other.
Morality of pity in the mouth of the intemperate. - All those who do not have
themselves  sufficiently under their own control and do  not know morality as a continual self-command and self-overcoming practised in great things  and  in the  smallest,  involuntarily become  glorifiers  of the  good,
pitying,  benevolent impulses,  of that instinctive morality which has  no
head  but seems to consist solely of heart and helping hands. It is,  indeed,
in their interest to cast suspicion on a morality of rationality and to make
of that  other morality the only one.
Cloaca of the soul. - The soul too has to have its definite cloaca into which it
allows its  sewage  to  flow  out:  what can  serve  as  these includes people,
relationships,  classes,  or the  Fatherland  or the world  or finally - for the
truly fastidious (I mean our dear modern 'pessimists') - God.
A kind of repose and contemplativeness. - Take care that your repose and contemplativeness  does  not  resemble  that  of a  dog  in  front  of a  butcher's shop,  whom fear will not permit to go forward and desire not permit to
go back and who  stands with his eyes gaping like mouths.
Prohibition  without  reasons.
A  prohibition  whose  reason  we  do  not
-
understand or admit is not only for the obstinate man but also for the man
thirsty for knowledge almost the injunction: let us put it to the test,  so as
to  learn  why  this  prohibition exists.  Moral prohibitions  such as  those  of
the Decalogue are suitable only for ages when reason is subjugated: nowadays a prohibition 'thou  shalt not kill',  'thou  shalt not commit adultery', presented  without  reasons,  would  produce  a  harmful  rather  than  a
beneficial effect.
Portrait from life. - What kind of a man is he who can say of himself: 'I find
it very easy to despise, but I never hate. In everyone I meet I immediately
discover  something  that  can  be  respected  and  on  account  of  which  I
respect  him:  the  so-called  amiable  qualities  possess  little  attraction  for
me.'
Pity and contempt. - To show pity is felt as a sign of contempt because one
has clearly ceased to be an object of fear as soon as one is pitied. One has
sunk below the level of equilibrium,  whereas human vanity is not satisfied even with  that,  the  sensation  most desired being one of predominance and the inspiration of fear. That is why the high value pity has come 322
T H E  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S  S H A DOW
to be accorded presents a problem, just as the praise now accorded selfless  disinterestedness  needs  to  be  explained:  originally  it was  despised, or feared as a deception.
The ability to be small. - One has still to be as close to the flowers, the grass
and the butterflies as is a child,  who is not so very much bigger than they
are. We adults,  on the other hand,  have grown up high above them and
have to condescend to them; I believe the grass hates us when we confess
our love for it.  - He who wants to partake of all good things must know
how to be small at times.
Content of the conscience. - The content of our conscience is everything that
was during the years of our childhood  regularly demanded of us without
reason by people we  honoured or feared.  It is  thus  the conscience  that
excites  that feeling of compulsion  ('I must do  this,  not  do  that')  which
does not ask: why must I? - In every case in which a thing is done with
'because'  and  'why'  man  acts  without  conscience;  but  not  yet  for  that
reason  against  it.  - The  belief  in  authorities  is  the  source  of  the  conscience:  it is therefore  not the voice of God in the heart of man but the voice of some men in man.
Overcoming of the passions. - The man who has overcome his passions has
entered into possession of the most fertile ground; like the colonist who
has mastered the forests and swamps. To sow the seeds of good spiritual
works in the soil of the subdued passions is then the immediate urgent
task.  The  overcoming  itself  is  only  a  means,  not  a  goal;  if it  is  not  so
viewed, all kinds of weeds and devilish nonsense will quickly spring up
in this rich soil now unoccupied, and soon there will be more rank confusion than there ever was before.
Aptitude for serving. - All so-called practical people possess an aptitude for
serving:  it  is  this  that  makes  them  practical,  indeed,  whether  on  their
own behalf or that of others.  Robinson possessed an even better servant
than Friday was: and that was Crusoe.
Linguistic danger to spiritual freedom. - Every word is a prejudice.
Spirit  and  boredom .  - The  saying  'The  Magyar  is  much  too  lazy  to  feel
bored' is thought-provoking. Only the most acute and active animals are
capable of boredom. - A  theme for a great poet would be God's boredom on
the seventh day of creation.
Our traffic with animals. - The origination of morality can also be observed
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
in our behaviour towards animals. Where utility or harm do not come into
consideration we have a feeling of complete irresponsibility; we kill and
injure insects,  for example,  or let  them live,  usually  without  giving the
slightest  thought  to the  matter.  We  are so  clumsy  that even  our acts of
kindness towards flowers and small creatures are almost always murderous: which in no way diminishes the pleasure we take in them. - Today is the festival of the small creatures,  the sultriest day of the year: all around
us there  is  swarming  and  creeping,  and  we  crush to death now  a little
worm,  now a  little winged beetle;  we do it without wanting to,  but also
without  care or concern.  - If an animal harms us we seek any means of
destroying it, and the means are often sufficiently cruel without our really
wanting  them to be:  it is the cruelty of thoughtlessness. If it is useful we
exploit  it:  until a  subtler prudence teaches us  that  certain  animals richly
repay  a  different  kind  of  treatment,  namely  being  cared  for  and  disciplined. It is only here that a sense of responsibility comes into being. Tormenting is  not practised against domestic animals; one man is indignant if  another  is  merciless  towards  his  cow,  quite  in  accordance  with  the
primitive  communal  morality  which  sees  the common welfare imperilled
whenever  an  individual  transgresses.  Whoever  in  the  community  perceives a transgression fears that harm will come to him indirectly: and we fear for the quality of our  meat,  our  husbandry and our currency  when
we see  domestic animals mistreated.  In addition  to  this,  he who is cruel
towards animals arouses the suspicion that he is also cruel towards weak,
subordinate people incapable of revenge; he counts as ignoble, as lacking
refinement in pride. Thus there come about the beginnings of moral sensation and judgement: the best is then added by superstition.  Many animals, through the way they look, sound and comport themselves, inspire men imaginatively to  transport themselves  into them,  and many religions
teach that,  under certain circumstances,  the souls of men and gods may
dwell  in  animals:  for  which  reason  they  recommend  a  noble  caution,
indeed  a  reverential  awe,  in traffic with  animals  in  general.  Even  after
this  superstition  has  vanished,  the  sentiments  it has  given  rise  to  continue  to operate,  mature  and flourish. - As is well known.  on this point Christianity has proved to be a barren and regressive religion.
New actors. - There is among men no greater banality than death; second
in line  stands  birth,  since all are not born who nonetheless  die; then follows  marriage.  But  these  worn-out  little  tragi-comedies  are  at  each  of their  uncounted  and  uncountable  performances  played  by  ever  new
actors  and  thus do  not  cease  to have  interested spectators:  whereas  one
would have  thought that  the entire audience at the world-theatre would
have  long  since  hanged  itself from  the  trees  out  of satiety  with  them which goes to show how much depends on new actors,  how little on the play.
What does  'obstinate' mean? - The shortest route is not the most direct but
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   HIS  S H A D O W
that upon which the most favourable winds swell our sails: thus do seafarers teach  us.  Not to follow  this teaching is to be obstinate: firmness of character is here polluted by stupidity.
6o
The word 'vanity'. - It is troublesome that certain words which we moralists cannot avoid using bear within them a kind of moral censure deriving from those  ages  in  which  the  most  immediate  and  natural  impulses  in
man  were  made  heretical.  Thus  that  fundamental  conviction  that  we
make good headway or suffer shipwreck on the ocean of society much
more through what we  count as than through what we are - a conviction
that has  to be  our rudder in all we  do that has a bearing on  society - is
branded with  the most general word  'vanity',  'vanitas',  one  of the most
abundantly content-full of all things with an expression that designates it
as emptiness and nullity, something large with a diminutive, indeed with
the penstrokes of caricature. There is no help for it, we are obliged to use
such  words,  but when we do so we must close our ears to the whisperings of ancient habits.
Mohammedan fatalism. - Mohammedan fatalism embodies the fundamental error of setting man and fate over against one another as two separate things: man, it says, can resist fate and seek to frustrate it, but in the end
it always carries off the victory; so that the most reasonable thing to do is
to resign oneself or to live just as one pleases. In reality every man is himself a piece of fate; when he thinks to resist fate in the way suggested, it is precisely fate that is here fulfilling itself; the struggle is imaginary, but so
is  the  proposed  resignation  to  fate;  all  these  imaginings  are  enclosed
within fate. - The fear most people feel in face of the theory of the unfreedom of the will is  fear in face of Mohammedan  fatalism:  they think that man will stand before the future feeble, resigned and with hands clasped
because he is incapable of effecting any change in it: or that he will give
free rein to all his impulses and caprices because these too cannot make
any worse what has already been determined. The follies of mankind are
just as much a piece of fate as are its acts of intelligence: that fear in face of
a belief in fate is also fate. You yourself, poor fearful man, are the implacable moira enthroned even above the gods that governs all that happens; you are the blessing or the curse and in any event the fetters in which the
strongest lies captive; in you the whole future of the world of man is predetermined: it is of no use for you to shudder when you look upon yourself.
Devil's advocate. - 'Only  when  we are  hurt ourselves do we become wise,
only when others are hurt do we become good' - so goes that curious philosophy which derives all morality from pity and all intellectuality from the isolation of man:  it thereby unconsciously becomes the advocate of all
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
the hurt and injury on earth. For pity has need of suffering and isolation
has need of the contempt of others.
Moral fancy-dress. - In those ages when the  fancy-dress worn by the different classes is considered as firmly fixed as the classes  themselves are, moralists are tempted  to regard moral fancy-dress too as absolute and to
depict  it as  such.  Thus  Moliere is comprehensible  as a contemporary of
the  society  of Louis  XIV;  in our  society,  which is  characterized  by  transitional forms and  halfway  stages, he would  seem,  though still a man of genius, a pedant.
The noblest virtue. - In the first era of higher humanity bravery is accounted the noblest of the  virtues,  in the  second justice,  in the  third moderation,  in the fourth  wisdom.  In which era  do we  live? In which do you live?
What is needed first. - A man who refuses to become master over his wrath,
his choler  and  revengefulness,  and his  lusts,  and  attempts  to  become a
master in anything else, is as stupid as the farmer who stakes out his field
beside a torrential stream without protecting himself against it.
What  is  truth?  - Schwarzert  (Melanchthon):*  'One  often  preaches  one's
faith precisely when one has lost it and is looking for it everywhere - and
at such a time one does not preach it worst!' - Luther: Thou speak'st true
today like an angel, brother! - Schwarzert: 'But it is thy enemies who think
this  thought  and  they apply  it to thee.' - Luther: Then  it's  a lie  from the
Devil's behind.
Habit of seeing opposites.  - The  general  imprecise  way  of  observing  sees
everywhere in nature opposites (as,  e.g., 'warm and cold') where there
are,  not  opposites,  but differences of degree.  This bad habit has led us
into  wanting  to  comprehend  and  analyse  the  inner  world,  too,  the
spiritual-moral  world,  in  terms  of  such  opposites.  An  unspeakable
amount  of  painfulness,  arrogance,  harshness,  estrangement,  frigidity
has  entered  into  human  feelings  because  we  think  we  see  opposites
instead of transitions.
Whether we are able  to forgive.  - How  can  one forgive them  at all,  if they
know not what they do! One has nothing whatever to forgive. - But does
a man ever know completely what he does? And if this must always remain
at  least  questionable,  then  men  never  do  have  anything  to  forgive  one
•  Philipp Melanchthon (Greek rendition of the German name 'Schwarzer!'); a professor of
classical  philosophy  who  made  contact  with  Luther  at  Wittenberg  and  identified  with  his
cause. He wrote the first major work of protestant  theology and represented the Lutherans at
Regensburg
THE  W A N D ER E R  A N D  H I S  S H A D O W
another and  pardoning is to the  most rational  man a  thing  impossible.
Finally: if the ill-doers really did know what they did - we would have a
right to forgive them only if we had a right to accuse and to punish them.
But this we do not have.
Habitual shame.  - Why  do  we  feel  shame  when  we  are  rendered  something  good  and  distinguishing  which,  as  we  put  it,  we  'have  not  deserved'? It seems to us that we have forced our way into a domain where we do not belong,  from which we ought to be excluded, into a sanctuary
or holy of holies, as it were, where our feet are forbidden to tread. Yet it is
through the error of others that we have arrived there:  and now we are
overcome partly by fear, partly by reverence, partly by surprise; we know
not  whether  we  ought  to  flee  or  to  enjoy  the  blessed  moment  and  its
undeserved advantages. Whenever we feel shame there exists a mystery
which seems to have been desecrated,  or to be in danger of desecration,
through us; all undeserved grace engenders shame. - If we consider,  however, that we have never 'deserved' anything at all, then if one acquiesces to this proposition within the Christian total view of things the feeling of
shame will become habitual:  because  such  a  god  seems  to  be  continually
blessing  and  bestowing  undeserved  grace.  But,  quite  apart  from  this
Christian  interpretation,  to  a  completely  godless  being  who  firmly
adhered to the total unaccountability and undeservingness of all behaviour and  being  this  condition  of  habitual shame would  be  possible:  if he was treated as though he had deserved this or that,  it would seem to him
that  he  had  forced  his  way  into  a  higher  order  of  beings  who  are able
to  deserve  something,  who  are  free  and  really  capable  of  bearing
responsibility for their own desires and actions.  He who says to him 'you
deserved it' seems to exclaim to him 'you are not a man, but a god' .
The ineptest educator. - In the case of one man all his  real virtues have been
cultivated in the soil of his spirit of contradiction, in the case of another in
his inability to say no, that is in his spirit of assent; a third has developed
all his morality out of his lonely pride,  a fourth his out of his strong drive
to sociability.  Suppose,  now, that in each of these four cases the seeds of
virtue had, through the ineptitude of teachers and the vagaries of chance,
not been sown in that region of his nature where the topsoil was richest
and most plentiful,  then they would be without morality and weak and
joyless men. And who would have been the ineptest of all educators and
the evil fatality of these four men? The moral fanatic,  who believes that
the good can grow only out of the good and upon the basis of the good.
Stylistic caution. - A: But if everyone knew this most would be harmed by it.
You yourself call these opinions dangerous for those exposed to danger,
and yet you express them in public? B: I write in such a way that neither
the  mob,  nor  the  populi,  nor the  parties  of any  kind  want  to  read  me.
J27
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
Consequently these opinions of mine will  never become  public.  A: But
how do you write, then? B: Neither usefully nor pleasantly - to the trio I
have named.
Divine missionaries. - Socrates too feels himself to be a divine missionary:
but even  here  there is perceptible I know not what touch of Attic irony
and sense of humour through which that unfortunate and presumptuous
concept is ameliorated. He speaks of it without unction: his images, of the
brake and the  horse,  are  simple and  unpriestly,  and the actual religious
task to which he feels himself called,  that of putting the god to the test in a
hundred UJays  to  see UJhether he  has told the  truth,  permits us to imagine
that  here  the  missionary  steps  up  to  his  god  with  a  bold  and  candid
deportment. This putting of the god to the test is one of the subtlest compromises between piety and freedom of spirit that has ever been devised.
- Nowadays we no longer have need even of this compromise.
Honest  painter.
Raphael,  who  was  much  concerned  with  the  church
-
(when  it  was  capable of paying)  but,  like the  best  men of his  age,  little
concerned with the objects of the church's faith,  did not compromise by
so  much  as  an  inch  with  the  pretentious,  ecstatic  piety  of  many  of  his
patrons: he preserved  his honesty even  in  that exceptional picture,  originally  intended  for  a  processional  banner,  the  Sistine  Madonna.  He wanted  for once  to  paint  a  vision:  but it was to be  such  a  one  as noble
young  men  without  'faith'  too  might  and  would  have,  the  vision  of  a
future  wife,  of a  clever,  noble-souled,  silent  and very beautiful woman
bearing  her  first-born  in her arms.  Let  the  old,  who  are accustomed  to
prayer and worship,  here revere something suprahuman, like the venerable  greybeard  to  the  left  of the  picture:  we  younger  men,  so  Raphael seems to cry to  us,  shall  go along  with  the  lovely girl on the right,  who
with her challenging and in no way devout expression says to the viewer
of the picture:  'This mother and her child - a pleasant, inviting sight, isn't
it?'  This  face  and  this  expression  reflects  the  joy  in  the  faces  of  the
viewers; the artist who invented it all in this way has the enjoyment of his
own joy and adds it to the joy of the recipients of his art. - With regard to
the  'saviour-like'  expression  in the  head  of a  child Raphael,  the honest
painter who had no wish to paint a state of soul in whose existence he did
not believe, has outwitted his believing viewers in a very cunning fashion;
he  has  painted  that  natural  phenomenon  which  is  not  all  that  rare  an
occurrence,  the eyes of a man in the head of a child,  and in this instance
the eyes of a valiant man ready to assist in some emergency or difficulty.
To these eyes there belongs a beard; that it is missing, and that two different  ages  of  life  here  speak  out  of  one  face,  is  the  pleasing  paradox which the faithful have interpreted in the sense of their belief in miracles:
which the artist was entitled to anticipate from their art of interpretation
and imposition of what they wish to see.
THE  W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
Prayer. - Only  under  two  presuppositions does prayer - that custom  of
earlier ages which has not yet completely  died out - make any sense: it
would have to be possible to induce or convert the divinity to a  certain
course of action,  and  the  person  praying  would  himself  have  to  know
best what he  needed,  what was truly desirable for  him.  Both presuppositions, assumed true and established by custom in all other religions, are however  denied  precisely  by  Christianity;  if  it  nonetheless  adheres  to
prayer in face of its belief in an omniscient and all-provident rationality in
God which renders prayer at bottom senseless and,  indeed,  blasphemous - in this it once again demonstrates its admirable serpent cunning; for a  clear commandment  'thou  shalt  not  pray'  would  have  led  Christians
into unchristianity through boredom. For in the Christian ora et labora, * the
ora  occupies  the  place  of pleasure:  and  what  would  those  unfortunates
who had renounced labora, the saints, have found to do if deprived of ora!
- but to converse with God, to demand of him all kinds of nice things, to
laugh at oneself a  little for being so foolish as still to harbour desires in
spite of having so excellent a  father - this was for the saints a very fine
invention.
A holy lie. - The lie which Arriat died with on her lips (Paete, non dolet)+
darkens all the  truths  that have ever been spoken by  the dying.  It is the
only holy lie that has become famous; whereas the odour of sanctity has
otherwise adhered only to errors.
The most necessary apostle. - Among twelve apostles there must always be
one as hard  as a rock,  so that the  new  church  may be erected  upon  him.
What is the more perishable, the spirit or the body? - In matters of law, morality
and  religion,  the  most  external  aspect,  that  which  can be  seen,  has,  as
usage, deportment, ceremony, the most durability: it is the body to which a
new soul is always being added. The cult is, like a fixed word-text, always
being subjected to new  interpretations;  concepts and  sensations  are the
liquid element, customs the solid.
Belief in the sickness as sickness. - It was Christianity which first painted the
Devil on the world's wall; it was Christianity which first brought sin into
the world.  Belief in the cure which it offered has now been shaken to its
deepest roots: but belief in the sickness which it taught and propagated continues to exist.
Speech  and  writing  of  the  religious.  - If  the  style  and  total  manner  of
•  ora et labora:  prayer and work
t  Arria: the wife of Caecina Peatus (see  Martial:  Epigrams I 13)
f  Paete .  dolet: It hardly hurts at all
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
expression  of the  priest,  in  both  speech  and  writing,  do not  already
proclaim the religious man,  then one no longer needs to take his opinions
on religion and in favour of religion seriously.  They have become invalid
for their possessor himself if, as his style betrays, he is given to irony, presumption,  malice,  hatred and all the confusions and changes the feelings are subject to, just like the most irreligious man; - how much more invalid
they must be for his auditors and readers! In short,  he will serve to make
them more irreligious.
8o
Danger in personality. - The  more God has counted as a discrete person,
the less  faithful one has been to him.  Men are far more attached to their
ideas than they are to their most beloved beloved: that is why they sacrifice themselves for the state,  the church, and also for God - so long as he remains their own production, their idea, and is not taken all too much for a
person.  In the latter case they almost always wrangle with him: even the
most  devout  of  men  gave  vent,  indeed,  to  the  bitter  exclamation:  'my
God,  why hast thou  forsaken me!'
Secular justice. - It is possible to lift secular justice off its hinges - with the
doctrine  that  everyone  is  wholly  unaccountable  and  innocent:  and  an
attempt has already been made  to  do something of the sort,  though on
the basis  of the antithetical  doctrine that everyone is wholly accountable
and  culpable.  It was the founder of Christianity  who wanted to abolish
secular justice and remove judging and punishing from the world. For he
understood all guilt as 'sin', that is to say as an offence against God and not
as an offence against the world; on the other hand, he regarded everyone
as being in the greatest measure and in almost every respect a sinner. The
guilty,  however,  ought  not  be  the  judges  of  their  own  kind:  thus  his
sense of  equity  dictated.  All  judges  of the  realm of  secular justice  were
thus in his eyes  as guilty as those  they condemned,  and the air of innocence they assumed seemed to hi_m  hypocritical and pharisaical.  He had eyes,  moreover,  only for the motives  of an action and not for its consequences,  and  considered  there  was  only  one  sole  person  sufficiently sharpsighted to adjudicate on motives: he himself (or, as he himself put
it, God).
An affectation on departing. - He who wants to desert a party or a religion
believes it is incumbent upon him to refute it.  But this is a very arrogant
notion. All that is needed is that he should be clear as to the nature of the
bonds that  formerly  tied him to this  party or religion  and to the fact that
they  no longer do  so;  that  he should  understand  what  kind  of  outlook
impelled him to them and  that it now impels him elsewhere. We did not
attach ourself to this party or religion on strictly rational grounds: we ought
not to affect to have  done so when we leave it.
Saviour and physician.  The founder of Christianity was, as goes without
-
THE  W A N D E RE R  A N D   H I S  S H A D O W
saying,  not  without  the  gravest  shortcomings  and  prejudices  in  his
knowledge of the human soul, and as a physician of the soul devoted to
that infamous and  untutored  faith in a  universal  medicine.  At times his
methods seem like those of a dentist whose sole cure for pain is to pull out
the teeth; as, for example, when he combats sensuality with the advice:  'If
thy eye offend thee,  pluck it out.' - But there is this difference,  that  the
dentist at least attains his object,  the cessation of pain in his patient; in so
clumsy a way, to be sure,  as to be ludicrous: while the Christian who follows  that  advice  and  believes  he  has  killed  his  sensuality  is  deceiving himself:  it  lives  on  in  an  uncanny  vampire  form and  torments  him  in
repulsive disguises.
The prisoners.  - One  morning  the  prisoners  entered  the  workyard:  the
warder was missing. Some of them started working straightaway, as was
their  nature,  others  stood  idle  and  looked  around  defiantly.  Then  one
stepped forward and said loudly:  'Work as much as you like, or do nothing:  it  is  all  one.  Your  secret  designs  have  come  to  light,  the  prison warder has been eavesdropping on you and in the next few days intends
to  pass a  fearful  judgement upon  you.  You know him,  he  is harsh and
vindictive. But now pay heed: you have hitherto mistaken me: I am not
what I seem but much more: I am the son of the prison warder and I mean
everything to  him.  I  can  save  you,  I  will save you:  but,  note well,  only
those of you  who believe me that I am the son of the prison warder;  the
rest may  enjoy the  fruit  of their unbelief.' - 'Well now',  said  one of the
older prisoners after a brief silence,  'what  can  it matter to you  if we believe you or do not believe you? If you really are his son and can do what you say,  then put in a good word for all of us:  it would be really good of
you if you did so. But leave aside this talk of belief and unbelief!' - 'And',
a younger man interposed,  'I don't believe him: it's only an idea he's got
into his head. I bet that in a week's time we  shall find ourselves here just
like  today,  and that the prison warder knows  nothing'. - 'And if he did
know  something he knows  it no  longer',  said the last of the prisoners,
who had only just  come into  the  yard;  'the prison warder has  just  suddenly died'. - 'Holla!' cried several together; 'holla! Son! Son! What does the will say? Are we perhaps now your prisoners?' - 'I have told you', he
whom they addressed  responded quietly,  'I  will set free everyone who
believes in me, as surely as my father still lives'. - The prisoners did not
laugh, but shrugged their shoulders and left him standing.
ss
The persecutor of God. - Paul conceived the idea,  and Calvin appropriated
the idea, that countless numbers have from all eternity been condemned
to damnation and that  this lovely universal plan was thus instituted so
that  the  glory  of  God  might  be  revealed  in  it;  Heaven  and  Hell  and
humanity are thus supposed to exist so as to - gratify the vanity of God!
What a cruel and insatiable vanity must have flickered in the soul of him
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
who  first  conceived  or  first  appropriated  such  a  thing!  - Paul  thus
remained Saul after all - the persecutor of God.
Socrates. - If all goes well,  the time will come when one will take up the
memorabilia of Socrates rather than  the  Bible  as a guide  to morals and
reason,  and when Montaigne and Horace  will be employed as forerunners  and  signposts  to  an  understanding  of  this  simplest  and  most imperishable  of intercessors.  The  pathways  of the  most  various  philosophical modes of life lead back to him; at bottom they are the modes of life  of  the  various  temperaments confirmed and  established  by  reason
and habit and all of them directed towards joy in living and in one's own
self;  from  which  one  might  conclude  that  Socrates'  most  personal
characteristic was a participation in every temperament. - Socrates excels
the founder of Christianity in being able to be serious cheerfully and in
possessing that wisdom full of roguishness that constitutes the finest state of
the human soul.  And he also possessed the finer intellect.
Learning to write well. - The age of speaking well is past, because the age of
the city cultures is past. The extreme limit Aristotle allowed for the size of
a  city - it must be possible for the  herald  to make himself audible  to the
whole assembled community - this  limit is of as little  concern to us as is
the  city  community  itself:  we  want  to  make  ourself  understood,  not
merely beyond the city,  but out over the nations.  That is why everyone
who is a good European now has to learn to write well and ever better: this is
still so even if he happens to have been born in Germany, where writing
badly is regarded as a national privilege. To write better, however, means
at the  same  time  also  to  think  better;  continually to  invent  things  more
worth  communicating  and  to be able actually to communicate them;  to
become  translatable into  the  language of one's neighbour;  to  make  ourselves accessible to the  understanding of those foreigners who learn  our language; to assist towards making all good things common property and
freely available to the free-minded; finally,  to prepare the way for that still
distant state of things in which the good  Europeans will come into possession  of their great task: the direction and supervision of the total culture of the earth.  - Whoever preaches the opposite and sets no store by writing well  and  reading well - both  virtues grow  together  and  decline
together - is in fact  showing  the  peoples  a way of becoming more  and
more  national:  he  is  augmenting  the  sickness  of this  century  and  is  an
enemy of all good Europeans, an enemy of all free spirits.
Teaching of the best style. - The teaching of style can on the one hand be the
teaching that one ought to discover the means of expression by virtue of
which every state of mind can be conveyed to the reader or auditor; on
the  other  hand,  it  can  be  the  teaching  that  one  ought  to  discover  the
means of expression for the most desirable state of mind,  the state, that is
THE  W A N D E RE R  A N D  H I S  S H A DOW
to say, which it is most desirable should be communicated and conveyed:
that of the  spiritually joyful,  luminous  and  honest man who  has overcome his passions.  This will be the teaching that there exists a best style: the style corresponding to the good man.
&)
Paying attention  to pace.  The pace of his  sentences  shows  whether  the
-
author is tired; the individual phrase can still be good and strong notwithstanding, because it was discovered earlier and independently when the idea  first  dawned  on  the  author.  This  is  frequently  so  in  the  case  of
Goethe, who too often dictated when he was tired.
Already and still. - A:  German prose is still very young: Goethe says that
Wieland was its father. B: So young and already so ugly! C: But I believe it
is true that Bishop Ulfilas* was already writing German prose; it is therefore getting on for 1500 years old.  B: So old and still so ugly!
Original  German.  German  prose,  which  is  in  fact  not  based  on  some
-
foreign model and ought no doubt to be accounted an original product of
German taste, might offer a signpost to the zealous advocates of a future
original German culture as to how, without imitation of foreign models, a
truly  German  costume,  for  instance,  a  German  social  gathering,  a
German furnishing of a room, a German luncheon,  would look. - Someone who had reflected long on this prospect finally cried out in horror:
'But,  for heaven's  sake,  perhaps we  already have this original culture only we don't like to talk about it!'
Forbidden books. - Never to read anything written by those arrogant knowails  and  muddle-heads  who  indulge  in  that  most  revolting form of illbreeding,  that  of  logical  paradox:  they  employ  the  forms  of  logic  in precisely those places where at bottom everything is impudently improvised and constructed in air. ('Thus' should in their case mean 'you ass of a reader,  for you there is no "thus" - though there is for me' - to which
the answer is: 'you ass of a writer, whatever do you write for then?')
Demonstrating  spirit.  - Anyone  who  wants  to  demonstrate  his  spirit
makes  sure  everyone  notices  that  he  is  abundantly  supplied  with  its
reverse.  That  ill-breeding  on  the  part  of gifted  Frenchmen  with  which
they  add  to  their  finest  notions  a  touch  of dedaint has  its  origin in the
intention of seeming richer than they are: they want to bestow languidly,
as though wearied by constant dispensing from overfull treasure-houses.
German and French literature. - The misfortune for the German and French
•  Bishop Ulfilas: Gothic apostle (c.  311  to 383), who translated the Bible into Gothic,  sometimes referred to as 'the father of Teutonic literature'.
t  dedain: disdain
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
literature of the past hundred years lies in the fact that the Germans left
the French school too soon - and that later the French entered the German
school too soon.
Our prose. - None of the present-day cultural nations has such bad prose
as  the  German;  and  if gifted  and  pampered  Frenchmen  say  there  is no
German prose - then we ought not really to be angry, for it is meant more
politely  than  we deserve.  When we look for reasons we arrive at  last  at
the curious conclusion that the German knows only improvised prose and has
no idea  at  all  that there  is  any other.  It sounds to him  simply  incomprehensible  if  an  Italian  says  that  writing  prose  is  as  much  harder  than writing  poetry  as  the  representation  of  naked  beauty  is  harder  to  the
sculptor than  that of beauty  draped.  One  has  to toil  honestly at verse,
image,  rhythm  and  rhyme - even  the  German  knows  that,  and  is not
inclined  to  accord  improvisatory  composition  an  especially  high value.
But to work on a page of prose as on a statue? - it sounds to him like something from the land of fable.
C)6
Grand style. - Grand style originates when the beautiful carries off the victory over the monstrous.
Avoidance.  - One  does  not  know  in  what  the  refinement  of  a  turn of
phrase or an expression employed by a distinguished spirit consists until
one can say what word every mediocre writer would unavoidably have
hit upon to express the same thing.  All great artists display when driving
their vehicle a  tendency  to avoidance,  to  running off the road - without
thereby having an accident.
Something like bread. - Bread neutralizes the taste of other foods, expunges
it;  that is why it is part of every more extended  meal.  In all works of art
there  has  to be  something like  bread,  so  that  they  can  contain  varying
effects:  if the  latter  followed  directly  one  upon  the  other  undivided  by
any  rest  or  pause  they  would  soon  exhaust  the  spectator  and  arouse
in  him  repugnance,  so  that  a  more  extended  artistic  meal  would  be  an
impossibility.
Jean Paul.,. - Jean Paul knew a great deal but had no science, was skilled
in all kinds of artistic artifices but had no art, found almost nothing unenjoyable but had no taste,  possessed feeling and seriousness but when he offered a  taste of them poured over them a repulsive broth of tears,  he
had  indeed  wit  - but  unhappily  far  too  little  to  satisfy  his  ravenous
•  Jean Paul: pen-name of Jean Paul Freidrich Richter (1763-1825): German novelist and man
of letters.
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
hunger for it: which is why it is precisely through his lack of wit that he
drives  the  reader  to  despair.  On  the  whole  he  was  a  motley,  strongsmelling weed that shot up overnight in the delicate fruitfields of Schiller and Goethe; he was a complacent, good man, and yet a fatality - a fatality
in a dressing-gown.
Knowing how to taste the opposite too. - To  enjoy a work of the past in the
way its  contemporaries enjoyed  it one has  to have on  one's  tongue the
taste prevailing at that time against which it was contrasted.
Spirits-of-wine  authors.  - Many  writers  are  neither  spirit  nor wine  but
spirits-of-wine:  they can catch fire and then they give off heat.
The mediating sense. - The sense of taste has, as the true mediating sense,
often  persuaded  the  other  senses  over  to  its  own  view  of  things  and
imposed  upon  them  its  laws  and  habits.  One  can  obtain  information
about  the  subtlest  mysteries  of the  arts  at  a  mealtable:  one  has  only to
notice what tastes good, when it tastes good, what it tastes good after and
for how long it tastes good.
Lessing. - Lessing possessed a genuine French virtue and was in general
as a writer the most diligent pupil of the French: he knows how to arrange
and exhibit his things well in the shop-window. Without this art his ideas
would,  like the objects of them,  have  remained  somewhat  in darkness,
and without this  having been any very great loss.  But many (especially
the  last generation of German scholars)  have learned much from his art
and countless numbers have  taken pleasure in it.  These learners,  to be
sure, did not also have to learn from him, as so many of them did, his unpleasant tone  of voice,  with its  mixture of quarrelsomeness and honest probity.  - As to Lessing the 'lyricist' everyone is now unanimous: as to
the 'dramatist' everyone will be.
Unwanted readers. - How an author is tormented by those gallant readers
with  thick,  clumsy  souls  who,  whenever they knock  against  anything,
fall over and hurt themselves!
Poets' thoughts. - The real thoughts of real poets all go about veiled,  like
the women in Egypt: only the deep eyes of the thought gaze out over the
veil.  - Poets'  thoughts  are  on  average  not  worth  as  much  as  they  are
accepted as being:  for one is also paying for the veil and for one's own
curiosity.
Write  simply  and  serviceably.  - Transitions,  amplifications,  colourful
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
emotions - all these we will allow the author and his book provided he
lets us have something solid in return.
Wieland. * - Wieland wrote German better than anyone (his translations of
Cicero's letters and of Lucian are the best German translations), but for all
that his thoughts no longer offer us material for thought.  We can endure
his cheerful moralities as little as his cheerful immoralities: both belong so
well together.  The people  who  took  pleasure in  them  were  no  doubt  at
bottom better people than we are - but also a good deal  slower  and more
ponderous people of the  kind  such  a writer had need of. - Goethe had  no
need of the Germans, which is why they in turn have no idea what use to
make of him.  Look  at even the best of our statesmen and artists: none of
them had Goethe for his educator - or can have.
Rare feasts.  Pithy compactness,  reposefulness and maturity - where you
-
find  these  qualities  in an author  stop  and  celebrate  a  long  feast  in  the
midst of the wilderness: it will be a long time before you experience such
a sense of wellbeing again.
10<)
The treasury of German prose. - Apart from Goethe's writings,  and in particular Goethe's conversations with  Eckermann,t the best German book there  is,  what is there  really of German  prose literature  that it would be
worthwhile  to  read  over and over again?  Lichtenberg's aphorisms,  the
first  book  of Jung-Stilling's  autobiography,t Adalbert  Stifter's Nachsommer§ and Gottfried Keller's Leute von Seldwyla§§ - and that for the present is all.
Written style and oral style. - The art of writing demands above all substitutes for the modes of expression available only to the speaker: that is to say, for gestures,  emphases,  tones of voice, glances. That is why written
style is quite different from oral style and something much more difficult:
- it  wants  to  make  itself  just as  comprehensible  as  the  latter but  with
fewer  means.  Demosthenes  delivered  his  orations  differently  from  the
way  in  which  we  read  them:  he  revised  them  for  reading.  - Cicero's
orations  ought  to  be  demosthenized  for  the  same  purpose:  at  present
there is much more Roman forum in them than the reader can take.
Cat.:fion in quoting. - Young authors do not know that a fine expression, a
•  Wieland:  Christoph Martin Wieland (1733-1813): German novelist, poet and man of letters.
t  Goethe's  conversations  with  Eckermann: Johann  Peter Eckermann's Conversations  with
Goethe was published  1837-48.
t  Jung-Stilling:  Heinrich Jung-Stilling (174o-1817)  published  his autobiography in  six  volumes between  1777 and the year of his death.
§  Adalbert Stifter (18o5-68) published his novel Nachsommer in  1857.
§§  Gottfried  Keller  (1819-90):  Swiss  poet  and  story-writer;  his  collection  of  novellas,  Die
Leute von Seldwyla,  appeared in two volumes in  1856 and  1874.
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
fine idea, looks fine only among its like and equals, that an excellent quotation can annihilate entire pages, indeed an entire book, in that it warns the  reader  and  seems  to  cry  out  to  him:  'Beware,  I  am  the  jewel  and
around me  there is  lead,  pallid,  ignominious lead!'  Every word,  every
idea,  wants  to  dwell  only  in  its own  company:  that  is  the  moral  of high
style.
How should errors be spoken? - One may dispute whether it is more harmful
when errors are spoken badly or as well as the finest truths.  What is certain is that in the former case they injure the head twofold and are harder to remove from it; on the other hand, their effect is not as certain as in the
latter case: they are not so infectious.
1 13
Circumscribing and enlarging.  - Homer circumscribed  the  compass  of his
material  and  reduced  it,  but  let  the  individual  scenes  expand  and
enlarged  them  - and  so,  later  on,  do  the  tragedians:  each  takes  the
material  in  smaller  portions  than  his  predecessors,  but  each  obtains  a
richer abundance of blooms  within this hedged-off garden enclosure.
Literature and morality casting light on one another. - Greek literature can be
employed  to  demonstrate  through  what  forces  the  Greek  spirit  developed and expanded, how it divided on to different paths and what it was that made it grow weak.  All this provides a picture of what at bottom happened to Greek morality too, and of what must happen to every morality: how it was at first compulsion and enforced with harshness, then gradually  grew  gentler;  how  at  last  men  came  to  take  pleasure  in  certain actions, in certain forms and conventions, and how there grew out of that
a tendency to appropriate the practice and possession of these things to
oneself;  how  the course becomes filled and overfilled with competitors,
how satiety supervenes,  new objects of contest and ambition are sought
and old ones recalled to life, how the spectacle is repeated and the spectators  grow  weary  of watching because  the  entire  circle  now  seems  to have  been  run  through  - - and  then  comes  a  stop,  a  last  breath:  the
streams  lose themselves in the sand. The end  has come, at least an end.
1 15
Which regions give lasting pleasure. - This region would be well suited to a
painting, yet I cannot find the formula for it, I cannot seize it as a whole. I
have noticed that all landscapes that make a lasting appeal to me possess
beneath all their multiplicity a simple geometrical shape.  No region can
give artistic pleasure if it lacks such a mathematical substratum. And perhaps this rule may also be applied metaphorically to men.
1 16
Reading  aloud.
The  ability  to  read  aloud  presupposes  the  ability  to
-
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
present:  one  has  only  pale  colours  to employ,  but  has  to  determine  the
exact proportions in which they shall appear before the full and deep colours  of the  ever-present and  determining background,  that  is to  say  to determine their presentation. One therefore  has to be capable of this art.
The dramatic sense.  He  who  lacks  the  four  more  refined  senses  of  art
-
seeks  to  understand  everything  with  the  coarsest,  the  fifth:  this  is  the
dramatic sense.
Herder. * - Herder is none of the things he induced others to suppose he
was (and which he himself wished to suppose he was): no great poet and
inventor,  no new  fruitful  soil  full of fresh primeval energy as yet unemployed.  He did possess,  however,  and in the  highest degree,  the ability to scent the wind; he perceived and  plucked  the firstlings of the  season
earlier than anyone else, so that others  could believe it was he who made
them grow:  his spirit lay in wait like a hunter between light and dark, old
and  young,  and wherever there were bridges,  hollows,  landslips,  signs
of hidden springs and new growth:  the restlessness of spring drove him
hither  and  thither,  but  he  himself was  not  spring!  - No  doubt  he  was
aware of this at times but certainly  did not want to believe it,  ambitious
priest that he was who would have so liked to have been the intellectual
pope of his age! This is what he suffers from: he seems to have lived for a
long  time  as  the  pretender  to  several  kingdoms,  indeed  to  a  universal
empire,  and he had adherents who believed in him:  the youthful Goethe
was among  them.  But whenever crowns were in the last resort conferred
he went away empty: Kant,  Goethe,  then the first real German historians
and  philologists  took  away  from  him  what  he  supposed  had  been
reserved  for  him  - yet  often  secretly  and  silently  did  not  suppose  had
been.  It was  precisely  when  he  doubted  himself  that he  liked  to  drape
himself in  dignity  and  enthusiasm:  these  were  all too often a cloak  designed to conceal many things and to deceive and console him himself.
He really did possess  fire and enthusiasm,  but  his ambition was  much
greater!  This  last  blew  impatiently  on  the  flame  and  made  it  flicker,
crackle  and  smoke  - his style flickers,  crackles  and  smokes - but he  desired a great flame,  and  this never broke forth!  He never sat at the table of the  actual  creators:  and  his  ambition  did  not allow  him  to  seat  himself
modestly among the actual partakers.  Thus he was a restless guest,  tasting in  advance  every  spiritual  dish  the  Germans  raked  together over a half-century from all the realms of space and time.  Never truly happy and
satisfied,  Herder  was  moreover  all  too frequently  ill:  then  envy  sometimes came and sat on his bed, and hypocrisy too paid him a visit.  Something injured and unfree continued to adhere to him:  and he lacks simple sturdy manliness more  than  any  other of our so-called  'classics'.
•  Herder: Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-x8o3): German critic and aesthetician.
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
Odour of words. - Every word has its odour:  there exists a harmony and
disharmony of odours and thus of words.
Fine style. - The invented style is an offence to the friend of fine style.
Vow. - I intend never again to read an author of whom it is apparent that
he  wanted  to  produce  a book:  but only those whose  thoughts  unintentionally became a book.
Artistic  convention.
Three-quarters  of  Homer  is  convention;  and  the
-
same is  true of all Greek artists,  who  had  no  reason to fall prey to  the
modern  rage  for originality.  They  lacked  all  fear of convention;  it was
through  this,  indeed,  that they were united  with  their public.  For conventions are the achieved artistic means, the toilsomely acquired common language,  through which the artist can  truly communicate himself to the
understanding  of  his  audience.  Especially  when,  like  the  Greek poets
and musicians, he wants to conquer immediately with each of his works since  he is accustomed  to contend  publicly  with  one or two rivals - the first condition is that he shall also be understood immediately: which is possible,  however,  only  through  convention.  That  which  the  artist  invents that goes beyond convention he adds of his own volition and puts himself at risk with  it,  the  most favourable outcome being that  he  creates  a new  convention. As a rule  what is original is admired,  sometimes  idolized, but rarely understood; obstinately to avoid convention means wanting  not  to  be  understood.  To  what,  then,  does  the  modern  rage  for originality point?
Affectation of scientificality on the part of artists. - Schiller believed, like other
German artists, that if one possesses spirit one is free to improvize with the
pen on all kinds of difficult subjects. And now his prose essays lie there in every respect a model of how not to tackle  scientific  questions  of aesthetics and morals - and a danger to young readers who in their admiration  for  Schiller  the  poet  lack  the  courage  to  think  ill  of  Schiller  the thinker and essayist. - The temptation to which the artist so readily and
so comprehensively succumbs for once to enter fields barred expressly to
him and to put a word in with regard to science - for even the best worker
sometimes  finds  his  trade  and his workplace unendurable - this  temptation draws the artist so far as to show all the world what it has no reason to see at all, namely that his thinking-room looks narrow and in disorder
- and  why  not?  he  doesn't  live  in  it!  - that  the  storecupboards of  his
knowledge are in part empty, in part filled with a medley of junk - and
why not? this state of things is at bottom not at all ill-suited to the artistchild - but especially that even for the simplest tools and tricks of scientific method with which the merest beginners are familiar his wrists are too thick and unpractised - and of this  too  he truly has no cause  to be
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
ashamed! - On the other hand, he often displays no little art in imitating
all  the blunders,  bad  habits and  bogus  scholarliness  to be  found  in  the
scientific guild,  in the belief that those things belong, if not to the heart of
the matter,  at any rate to its outward appearance; and this,  precisely,  is
what is comical about such artists' writings: without wishing to, the artist
here  nonetheless  does  what it is his office to do - to parody the scientific
and inartistic nature. For a parodistic posture is the only posture he ought
to adopt towards science, insofar, that is, as he remains an artist and only
an artist.
The Faust idea. - A  little seamstress is  seduced and dishonoured; a great
scholar of all  the  four  faculties  is  the  miscreant.  But  that  surely  cannot
happen  in  the  right  nature  of  things?  No,  by  no  means!  Without  the
assistance of the Devil in person the great scholar could not have brought
it about.  - Is this really supposed to be the greatest German 'tragic idea',
as Germans say it is? - But even this idea was still too dreadful for Goethe;
after the little  seamstress,  'the  good  soul who erred but once',  had  suffered an involuntary death,  his gentle heart could not refrain from transporting her into the proximity of the saints; indeed, in due course he even sent  to  Heaven  the  great  scholar,  the  'good  man'  with  the  'impulse
obscure', through a trick played on the Devil at the decisive moment: - up
in Heaven the lovers find one another again.  - Goethe once said that his
nature was too conciliatory for real tragedy.
Is  there such a  thing as a  'German classic'?  Sainte-Beuve* once remarked
-
that the word 'classic' altogether refused to sound right when applied to
certain  literatures:  who,  for  example,  would  find  it  easy  to speak of a
'German classic'! - What is the view of our German booksellers, who are
on  their  way  to  augmenting  the  fifty  German  classics  in  whom  we  are
already supposed to believe with a further fifty? Does it not seem  that an
author needs only to have been dead  thirty years and to lie there in public
as permitted prey for him  suddenly to hear the trumpet of the resurrection summoning him to rise as a classic? And this in an age and among a nation  where even of the six great ancestors of its literature five are unmistakably  becoming or have  already become antiquated - without this age or this nation needing to be ashamed on precisely that account! For it
is in face of the strong of this age that they have receded - this much must
in all fairness be admitted! - Goethe,  as already indicated,  I except;  he
belongs in a higher order of literatures than 'national literatures': that is
why he stands  towards his nation in the relationship neither of the living
nor of the novel nor of the antiquated.  Only for a few was he alive and
does he live still: for most he is nothing but a fanfare of vanity blown from
time  to  time  across  the  German  frontier.  Goethe,  not  only a  good  and
great human being but a culture, Goethe is in the history of the Germans
an  episode  without  consequences:  who  could,  for example,  produce a
•  Sainte-Beuve: Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve (18o4-69): French critic.
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
piece of Goethe from the world of German politics over the past seventy
years!  (whereas a piece of Schiller at any rate has been active there,  and
perhaps  even  a  little  piece  of  Lessing).  But  the  other  five!  Klopstock
became,  in a very respectable way, antiquated even during his own lifetime:  and  so  thoroughly  that  the  reflective  book  of his  later  years,  the Gelehrten-Republik, has to the present day been taken seriously by no one.
Herder  suffered  the  misfortune  that  his  writings  were  always  either
novel or antiquated,  to  stronger and more refined heads  (as  to  Lichtenberg)  even  Herder's  chief  work,  his  Ideen  zur  Geschichte der Menschheit, was  something  antiquated  as  soon  as  it  appeared.  Wieland,  who  lived
abundantly and bestowed abundant life,  was shrewd enough to realize
that  his influence would  vanish with  his  death.  Lessing is perhaps  still
alive  today - but among young and ever younger scholars! And Schiller
has  by  now  fallen  out of the  hands  of youths  into  those  of boys,  of all
German  boys!  To  descend  down  to  ever  more  immature  readers  is,
indeed, a familiar way for a book to become antiquated.  - And what is it
that has repelled these five, so  that well-educated and industrious men
no  longer read them?  An  improved taste,  an  improved knowledge,  an
improved  respect for the true and real:  thus nothing but virtues which
precisely these five (and  ten  or twenty others  with less audible names)
first again implanted in Germany and which now stand about their graves
as  a  tall  forest  and  spread  over  them,  together  with  the  shadow  of
reverence, also something of the shadow of oblivion. - But classics are not
implanters  of intellectual  and  literary  virtues,  they are  perfecters  of them
and  their  highest  points  of  light,  which  remain  standing  above  the
nations after these nations themselves have perished: for they are lighter,
freer,  purer  than  they.  An  exalted  condition  of mankind  is possible  in
which the Europe of nations will be lost in dark oblivion,  but in which
Europe will live on  in thirty very old but  never antiquated books:  in the
classics.
Interesting but not beautiful. - This region conceals its meaning; but it has a
meaning and one would like to discover what it is: wherever I look I read
words and hints of words, but I do not know where the sentence begins
that will unravel the riddle contained in all these hints, and I become wrynecked in searching for its starting place.
Against  innovators  in  language.  - To  employ  innovations  or  quaint  old
terms in language, to favour the rare and strange, to be concerned to augment vocabulary rather than to restrict it, is always a sign of an immature or corrupted taste.  A noble poverty, but a masterly freedom within this
unpretentiousness,  is  what  distinguishes  the  Greek  artists  of  speech:
they want to have less than the people have - for it is they who are richest
in old and new terms - but they want to have this less in better shape. Their
archaisms and uncommon terms are soon added up, but there is no end
to our admiration if we have an eye for the light and delicate way  they
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
have  with  the  everyday  and  seemingly  long  since  exhausted  in  words
and phrases.
Melancholy and serious authors. - He who reduces to paper what he is suffering will be a melancholy author. a serious author, however, is one who tells us  what  he has suffered and why he is now reposing in joy.
Healthy taste.  - Why is it  that health  is  not as infectious as sickness - in
general  but  especially  in  matters  of  taste?  Or  are  there  epidemics  of
health? -
Resolution.  Never again  to  read  a  book  which  was  born  and  baptized
-
(with  ink)  simultaneously.
Improving  one's  thoughts.  To  improve  one's  style  - means  to  improve
-
one's  thoughts and nothing else! - If you do not straightaway agree with
this it will be impossible to convince you of it.
Classic books. - The weakest side of every classic book is  that it is  written
too much in its author's mother tongue.
Bad books. - A book ought to long for pen,  ink and writing-desk: but as a
rule  pen,  ink and  writing-desk  long  for  a  book.  That  is  why books are
nowadays of so  little account.
Presence of  interest.  When  it  reflects on  pictures,  the public becomes  a
-
poet,  and  when  it  reflects  on  poems  it  becomes  a  researcher.  At  the
moment the artist calls to it, it never has the right kind of interest: presence
of interest,  not presence of mind, is what it lacks.
Choice  thoughts.  - The  choice  style  of an age of  significance  chooses  not
only  the  words  but  also  the  thoughts - and  chooses  them  both  out  of
what  is  in current  use:  daring and  all  too  fresh-smelling thoughts are  no
less  repugnant to the  more  mature  taste  than  are rash  new expressions
and images. Both of them - the choice thought and the choice word - can
later  easily  smell  of  mediocrity,  because  the  odour  of  choice  things
quickly evaporates, and then all that is left to taste in them is the current
and everyday.
Chief reason for corruption of style. - To desire to demonstrate more feeling for
a thing than one actually has corrupts one's style, in both language and all
the arts. All great art has, rather, the opposite tendency: like every man of
T HE  W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
moral consequence, it likes to arrest the feelings on their course and not
allow them to run quite to their conclusion. This modesty which keeps the
feelings only  half-visible  can  be  observed  at its  fairest in,  for  example,
Sophocles;  and it seems to transfigure the  features of the feelings when
they present themselves as being more sober than they are.
In defence of ponderous stylists. - What is said lightly seldom falls as heavily
upon the ear as the  subject really weighs - the fault,  however,  lies with
the ill-schooled ear, which has to progress from education through what
has  hitherto been called  music on  to  the  school of higher composition,
that is to say that of speech.
Bird's-eye view. - Here torrential streams plunge from many directions into
a gorge: their motion is so violent, and draws the eyes so vigorously after
it, that the bare and wooded cliffs all around seem, not to sink, but to flee
down. The prospect arouses in us an anxious  fear,  as  though  something
inimical  lay  behind  it all  from  which  everything  had  to  take flight and
against which the abyss would lend us protection. This region cannot in
any way be painted unless one is hovering above it in the air like a bird.
Here the so-called  bird's-eye view is for once not an artistic caprice but
the sole possibility.
Daring  comparisons.
When  daring  comparisons  are  not  proof  of  the
-
writer's wanton mischievousness they are proof of the exhaustion of his
imagination.  In any case, however, they are proof of his very bad taste.
Dancing in  chains.  - With every  Greek  artist,  poet and writer one has to
ask: what is the new constraint he has imposed upon himself and through
which he charms his contemporaries (so that he finds imitators)? For that
which we call 'invention' (in metrics, for example) is always such a selfimposed  fetter.  'Dancing  in  chains',  making  things  difficult  for  oneself and then spreading over it the illusion of ease and facility - that is the artifice they want to demonstrate to  us.  Already in Homer we can perceive an abundance of inherited formulae and epic narrative rules within which
he had to dance: and he himself created additional new conventions for
those who came after him. This was the school in which the Greek poets
were  raised:  firstly to  allow  a  multiplicity  of constraints  to  be imposed
upon one;  then to devise an additional new constraint,  impose it upon
oneself and conquer it with charm and grace: so that both the constraint
and its conquest are noticed and admired.
Plentiful authors. - The last thing a good  author acquires is plentifulness;
he who brings it with him will never be a good author.  The noblest racehorses are lean until they have won the right to rest and recover from their victories.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Panting  heroes.  - Poets  and  artists  who  suffer  from  asthmatic  narrowchestedness of the feelings are most liable to make their heroes pant: they do not  know how to breathe  easily.
The half-blind. - The half-blind are the mortal foes of authors who let themselves go. They would like to vent on them the wrath they feel when they slam shut a book whose author has taken fifty pages to communicate five
ideas: their wrath,  that is, at having endangered what is left of their eyesight  for  so  little  recompense.  A  half-blind  man  said:  all  authors  let
-
themselves go. - 'Even the Holy Ghost?' - Even the Holy Ghost. But with
him it was all right; he wrote for the totally blind.
The style of immortality. - Thucydides and Tacitus• - both when they com-
posed their works did so with a view to their enduring immortally: if one
did not know this from other sources,  the fact would already be apparent
from their style. One believed he could bestow durability through salting
and  pickling,  the  other  through  boiling  and  preserving;  and  neither,  it
seems,  was wrong.
Against images and similes.  With  images  and  similes one  can  persuade
-
and  convince  but  not  prove.  That  is  why  there  is  such  an  aversion  to
images  and  similes within  science;  here  the  persuasive  and  convincing,
that which makes credible, is precisely what is not wanted; one challenges,
rather,  the coldest mistrust, and does so even in the means of expression
one employs and the bare walls it presents: because mistrust is the touchstone for the gold of certainty.
Caution. - He who lacks thorough knowledge should take care not to publish a book in Germany.  For the good German then says,  not 'he is ignorant',  but  'he  is  of  doubtful  character' .  - This  precipitate  conclusion, moreover,  does credit to the Germans.
Painted skeletons. - Painted skeletons are those authors who would like to
compensate with artificial colouring for what they lack in flesh.
The grandiloquent style and what is higher. - One learns how to write grandiloquently more quickly than one learns how to write simply and easily.
The reasons for this merge into the realm of morality.
Sebastian Bach. - Insofar as one does not listen to  Bach's music as a com-
•  Tacitus: Gaius Cornelius Tacitus  (c.  55 to  120):  Roman historian.
T H E   W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A DOW
plete  and  experienced  expert  in counterpoint  and  every  species  of the
fugal style of composition,  and must consequently do without the actual
artistic pleasure it affords,  it will seem  to us when we hear his music as
though (to employ a grandiose expression of Goethe's) we were present
as God was creating  the world. That  is to say,  we feel that here something
great is  in process of becoming but does  not yet exist: our great modern
music.  It has already conquered the world because it has conquered the
church,  national  characteristics,  and  counterpoint.  In Bach  there  is  still
too much crude Christianity,  crude Germanism,  crude  scholasticism;  he
stands  on  the  threshold  of  European  (modern)  music,  but  from  here
looks behind him back towards the Middle Ages.
Handel.  - Handel,  in  the invention  of his  music  bold,  innovative,  true,
strong,  capable  of heroism - often becomes in  its working out cold  and
restrained, indeed weary of himself; he employed certain tested methods
of execution,  wrote quickly and a great deal,  and was glad when he was
finished - but not glad in the way God and other creators have been in the
evening of their working day.
Haydn. - To the extent that genius can be united  with an altogether good
man,  Haydn possessed  it.  He  goes  precisely as far as  the  limits morality
draws for the intellect; the music he composes is all music with 'no past'.
Beethoven and Mozart. - Beethoven's music often seems like a deeply affected  meditation  on  unexpectedly  hearing  again  a  piece,  'Innocence  in Sound',  long believed  to  have been lost:  it is music about music.  In the
song� of beggars and children in the streets, in the montonous tunes of
travelling Italians, at the dances in the village inn or on carnival nights that is where he discovers his 'melodies': he collects them together like a bee,  by  seizing  a  sound  here,  a  brief  resolution  there.  To  him they  are
recollections of a 'better world',  in much the same way as Plato conceived
of Ideas. - Mozart's relation to his melodies is quite different: he finds his
inspirations,  not in listening to music, but in looking at life, at the liveliest
life of the south: he was always dreaming of Italy when he was not there.
Recitative.  - Formerly  recitative  was  dry;  now  we  live  in  the age of wet
recitative: it has melted away and now flows about it knows not where or
whither.
'Cheerful' music.  - If one has gone without music for a long time it afterwards enters  the  blood  all  too quickly like a  heavy  southern wine,  and leaves  behind  a  soul  narcotically  dulled,  half-awake  and  longing  for
sleep; this is especially the effect of cheerful music, which produces bitterness and a sense of hurt,  satiety and homesickness all at the same time, 345
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
and compels one to gulp down everything again and again as though in a
sugared  draught  of poison.  The  joyful  hall  then  seems  to  close  in,  the
light to lose its brightness and become browner: at last it is as though the
music were penetrating into a prison cell where a poor wretch lies sleepless  from homesickness.
Franz Schubert.  Franz Schubert, a lesser artist than the other great com-
-
posers,  nonetheless  possessed  the  greatest  inherited  wealth  of  music  of
any of them. He squandered it with liberal generosity:  so that composers
will have his ideas and inspirations to feast on for another couple of centuries.  In his works  we have a  treasury  of unemployed  inventions;  others will find their greatness in employing  them.  - If one may call Beethoven
the  ideal  audience  for  a  music-maker,  then  Schubert  has  a  right  to  be
called the  ideal music-maker himself.
The most  modern  musical  execution.  - The  grand  tragic-dramatic  mode  of
musical  execution  acquires  its  character  through  imitating  the  demeanour of the great sinner as Christianity imagines him and desires him to be: the slow pace,  the passionate brooding,  the agitation through torment of
conscience,  the terrified praying and pleading,  the enraptured grasping
and  seizing,  the halting in despair - and  whatever  else marks  a man as
being in a state of great  sin.  Only the presupposition of Christianity that
all  men  are  great  sinners  and  do  nothing  whatever  except  sin  could
justify  applying  this  style  of execution to all music:  insofar,  that is,  that
music is taken to be an image of all human life and action and as such has
continually  to  speak  the  gesture-language  of  the  great  sinner.
A  listener who was  insufficient of a  Christian  to comprehend this  logic
might,  to  be  sure,  exclaim  in  horror  when  witnessing  such  a  performance:  'For Heaven's sake,  how-ever did sin get into music!'
Felix Mendelssohn. - Felix Mendelssohn's music is the music of the enjoyment  of  whatever  is  good  and  is  precedented:  it  always  points  back behind itself. How could it have  much  'before it', much future!-But then
did he  want a  future?  He  possessed  a  virtue  rare  among artists,  that  of
gratitude  without  mental reservations:  and this virtue too always points
back behind  itself.
A mother of the arts. - In our sceptical age actual devotions require an almost
brutally  heroic ambitiousness; fanatical  eye-closing  and knee-bending are
no longer enough.  Might it not be possible that the ambition to be the last
of all the ages in the matter of devotion could become the father of a last
Catholic church music,  as it has already been the father of the last Catholic style of architecture? (It is called the Jesuit style.)
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D OW
Freedom in fetters - a princely freedom . - The last of the modern composers
to  behold  and  worship  beauty  as  Leopardi  did,  the  inimitable  Pole,
Chopin - no one before or after him has a claim to this epithet - Chopin
possessed the same princely nobility in respect of convention as Raphael
shows in the employment of simplest, most traditional colours - not with
regard to colours,  however, but in regard to traditional forms of melody
and rhythm.  These,  as born to etiquette,  he  admits without dispute,  but
does  so  playing  and  dancing  in  these  fetters like  the  freest  and  most
graceful  of  spirits  - and  does  so,  moreover,  without  turning  them  to
ridicule.
t6o
Chopin's Barcarole. - Almost all conditions and ways of life have a blissful
moment,  and  good  artists  know  how  to  fish  it  out.  Such  is  possessed
even by a life spent beside the beach, a life that unwinds tediously, insalubriously,  unhealthily  in  the  proximity  of  the  noisiest  and  greediest rabble - this blissful moment Chopin has, in his Barcarole, expressed in
sound in such a way that the gods themselves could on hearing it desire
to spend long summer evenings lying in a boat.
Robert  Schumann.  - The  'youth'  as  the Romantic  lyricists  of France  and
Germany dreamed of him in the first third of this century - this youth has
been completely translated into sound and song - by Robert Schumann,
the eternal youth so long as he felt himself to be in the fullness of his own
strength:  there  are,  to  be  sure,  moments  when  his  music  recalls  the
eternal 'old maid' .
Dramatic singers.  'Why  is  this beggar singing?'  - He  probably  doesn't
-
know how  to wail.  - 'Then he  is doing right:  but our dramatic  singers
who wail because they  don't know how to sing - are they  too doing the
right thing too?'
Dramatic music.  - To  him who  does  not  see  what is  taking place  on  the
stage,  dramatic music is an absurdity,  just as a  continuous  commentary
to a lost text is an absurdity. What it is really demanding is that one's ears
should  be  where  one's  eyes  are;  that,  however,  constitutes  a  rape  on
Euterpe:• this poor muse wants her eyes and ears left where all the other
muses have them.
Victory and rationality. - As in the case of other wars, so in that of the aesthetic wars which artists provoke with their works and their apologias for them the outcome is,  unhappily, decided in the end by force and not by
•  Euterpe:  muse of music
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
reason.  All the world now accepts it as an historical fact that Gluck* was
in the right in his struggle with Piccini: in any event, he won; force was on
his side.
On  the principles of musical  performance.  - Do  our  present-day  artists  of
musical  performance really  believe,  then,  that  the  supreme  commandment of their art is to give every piece as much high relief as they possibly can,  and  make  it  speak  in  dramatic  language  at  all  cost?  Is  this,  when
applied for instance to Mozart, not simply a sin against the spirit, against
the  cheerful,  sunny,  tender,  frivolous  spirit of Mozart,  whose  seriousness is a goodnatured and not a dreadful seriousness, whose pictures do not desire to leap out of the wall so as to drive his audience away in terror.
Or do you think that Mozartian music means the same thing as 'the music
of the  stone  guest'?  And  not  only  Mozartian  but  all  music?  - But  you
retort  that  the  greater effect speaks in favour of your principle - and you
could  be  right,  provided  that  no  one  asked  the  counter-question  upon
whom the effect was  supposed to be  produced  and upon whom a noble
artist  ought  to  want  to  produce  an effect  at  all!  Never  upon  the  people!
Never upon the immature! Never upon the sentimental!  Never upon the
sickly!  But above all:  never upon  the dull and stupefied!
Music of today. - This latest music, with its strong lungs and weak nerves,
is terrified above all of itself.
Where music is at home. - Music achieves great power only among people
who  cannot or are not  allowed  to  discourse.  Its principal promoters are
therefore  princes  who want little criticism,  indeed little thought at all, to
take  place  in their vicinity;  then societies which,  under some repression
or other  (princely  or religious),  have  to accustom themselves to silence
but therefore seek all the most  powerful charms against emotional boredom  (usually  everlasting  love-affairs  and  everlasting  music);  thirdly entire  nations in which there exists no 'society' but for that reason all the
more  individuals  with  an  inclination  to  solitude,  to  half-obscure  cogitations and to a reverence for everything ineffable: these are the true musical  souls.  - The  Greeks,  as  a  voluble  and  disputatious  people,  could therefore  endure  music  only  as  a  seasoning  for  those  arts  that  could
actually be talked about and  disputed over:  whereas it is  hardly  possible
even  to  think clearly  about  music.  The  Pythagoreans,  those  exceptions
among  the  Greeks  in  many  respects,  were  reportedly  also  great  musicians: they who invented the five-year silence but did not invent dialectics.
•  Gluck  . . .  Piccini:  Christopher  Willibald  von Gluck  (1714-87),  German  operatic  composer; Nicola Piccini (1728-tSoo), Italian operatic composer.  The supporters of each clashed in Paris in the 178o's  over which  of their respective compositions of Iphigt!nie en Tauride was superior,  Gluck's 'reform'  opera or Piccini's traditional style.
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S  S H A D O W
t68
Sentimentality  in  music.  - However  favourably  inclined  we  may  be
towards serious and opulent music,  there are perhaps,  and for that very
reason,  hours  when  we  are  overcome,  enchanted  and  almost  melted
away  by  its  opposite:  I  mean  by  those  utterly  simple  Italian  operatic
melismas which,  in  spite of all  their rhythmic monotony and  harmonic
childishness,  sometimes seem to sing to us like the  soul of music itself.
Whether you admit it or not, you pharisees of good taste, it is so, and it is
now my concern to discuss the riddle presented by  the fact that it is so
and to offer a few guesses at its solution. - When we were still children
we  tasted  the  virgin  honey  of many  things  for  the  first  time,  and  the
honey never again tasted so good, it seduced us to life, to living as long as
we could, in the shape of our first spring, our first flowers, our first butterflies, our first friendship. At that time - it was perhaps about the ninth year of our life - we heard the first music that we actually understood, the
simplest  and  most  childish  music  therefore·,  not  much  more  than  a
spinning-out  of our  nurse's  song  or  the  organ-grinder's  tune.  (For one
has  first  to  be  prepared  and  instructed  even  for  the  most  trifling  'revelations'  of art:  there  is  no  such  thing as  a  'direct'  effect of art,  however much the philosophers may have fabled of it.) It is to these first musical
delights - the strongest of our life - that our sensibilities connect when we
hear  those  Italian melismas:  childhood happiness and  the loss  of childhood, the feeling that what is most irrecoverable is our most precious possession  - this  too  touches  the  strings  of  our  soul  and  does  so  more powerfully than art alone,  however serious and  opulent,  is able to do.  -
This mixture of aesthetic joy with a moral grief which it is now customary
to call 'sentimentality' - somewhat too haughtily, it seems to me (it is the
mood of Faust at the end of the first scene) - this 'sentimentality' on the
part of the listener, which experienced connoisseurs of art, the pure 'aestheticians', like to ignore,  works in favour of Italian music. - Almost all music,  moreover,  produces  a  magical  effect  only  when  we  hear  the
language of our own past speaking out of it: and to this extent all old music
seems to the layman to get better and better and that only just born to be
of  little  worth:  for  the  latter  does  not  yet  excite  that  'sentimentality'
which, as aforesaid, constitutes the essential element of pleasure in music
for anyone incapable of taking pleasure in this art purely as an artist.
As friends  of  music.
In  the  last  resort  we  are  and  remain  well  dis
-
posed  towards  music  for  the  same  reason  we  are  and  remain  well
disposed towards  moonlight.  Neither wishes to supplant the sun,  after
all - both desire only to the best of their ability to illumine our nights. And
yet - may we not make fun of them and laugh at them nonetheless? Just a
little,  at least?  And from  time to time?  At the man in the moon!  At the
woman in music!
HUM A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
Art in the age of work. - We  possess  the conscience of an industrious age:
and  this  conscience  does  not  permit  us  to  bestow  our  best  hours  and
mornings  on art,  however grand and worthy this art may be.  To us art
counts as a leisure, a recreational activity: we devote to it the remnants of
our time and energies.  - This is the most general circumstance through
which  the relationship of art to  life has been  altered:  when it makes  its
grand demands  on the time and energy of the recipients of art it has the
conscience of the industrious and able against it, it is directed to the conscienceless and lazy,  who,  however,  are in accordance with their nature unfavourably  inclined  precisely  towards grand art and  feel  the  claims  it
makes to be presumptuous. It may therefore be that grand art is facing its
end from lack of air and the room to breathe it:· unless,  that is, grand art
tries,  through a kind of coarsening and disguising,  to become at home in
(or at least to endure) that other air which is in reality the natural element
only of petty art,  of the art of recreation and distraction. And this is now
happening  everywhere;  artists  of grand art too now promise recreation
and  distraction,  they  too  direct  their attentions  to  the  tired  and  weary,
they too entreat of them the  evening  hours of their working day - just as
do the artists of entertainment,  who are content to have achieved a victory over the serious brow and the sunken eye. What artifices, then, do their greater comrades employ? They have in their dispensary the mightiest  means  of  excitation  capable  of  terrifying  even  the  half-dead;  they have narcotics,  intoxicants,  convulsives,  paroxysms of  tears:  with these
they  overpower  the  tired  and  weary,  arouse  them  to  a  fatigued  overliveliness and make them beside themselves with rapture and terror. On account of the perilousness of these  means  it employs,  ought one to denounce grand art in the forms in which it now exists - opera, tragedy and music - as the most deceitful of sinners? Not at all: for it would a hundred
times prefer to dwell in the pure element of the quietness of morning and
address itself to the expectant, wakeful, energetic soul.  Let us be grateful
to it that it has consented to live as it does rather than flee away: but let us
also admit to ourselves that an age  which  shall one day bring back true
festivals of joy and  freedom  will have no use for our art.
The employees of science and  the others. - The  truly efficient and successful
scholars  could  one  and  all  be  described  as  'employees'.  When  in  their
youth they had perfected their skills and crammed their memories, when
hand  and  eye  had  acquired  certainty,  they  were  directed  by  an  older
scholar  to a place in science  where  their  qualities  would be useful; later
on, after they themselves had become accomplished enough to detect the
gaps  and  faults  in  their  science,  they  posted  themselves  of  their  own
accord to where they were needed. These natures one and all exist for the
sake of  science:  but there are rarer,  rarely  successful and wholly mature
natures  'for the sake of whom  science exists'  - at least that is what they
themselves  think  - :  frequently  unpleasant,  frequently  arrogant,  fre-
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
quently wrong-headed but almost always to a certain extent bewitching
men.  They  are  not  employees,  neither  are  they  employers,  they  avail
themselves of that which these have laboured to ascertain and do so with
a certain princely composure  and  rarely  with  more  than a  modicum  of
praise: as though, indeed, those employees and employers belonged to a
lower species of beings.  And yet they possess precisely the same qualities
as these employers and employees do, and sometimes even in an inferior
state of development:  they are, moreover, characterized by a narrow limitedness  foreign  to  the  former,  on  account  of  which  it  is  impossible  to appoint them to a post or see in them usable instruments - they can live
only in their own atmosphere and on their own soil.  This limitedness proffers them all of a science that  'belongs to them',  that is to say all they can bear home with  them  to their atmosphere and dwelling; they fancy they
are  collecting  together  their  scattered  'property'.  If  they  are  prevented
from constructing their own nest they perish like house less birds; unfreedom is phthisis to them. If they cultivate individual regions of science in the way the others do, it is always only those regions where the fruit and
seeds they themselves need will prosper; what is it to them if science as a
whole  has regions  untilled  and ill cultivated? They lack all impersonal interest in a problem; just as they themselves are personalities through and through, so all their insights and acquirements in the field of knowledge
coalesce together into a personality, into a living multiplicity whose individual parts  are  dependent on  one  another,  cleave  to  one  another,  are nourished  by  the  same  food,  and  as  a  whole  possesses  its  own atmosphere  and  its  own  odour.  - Natures  such  as  this  produce,  with  their personality-informed structures  of  knowledge,  that  illusion  that  a  science
(or even the whole of philosophy) is finished and has reached its goal; it is
the life  in  their structure  that performs  this magic,  which has  at  times
been very  fateful for science and misleading for those able and efficient
workers of the spirit just described,  though at other times,  when aridity
and exhaustion have reigned,  it has acted as a balm and like the breath of
a cool,  refreshing oasis.  - The  name usually give to such men is philosophers.
Recognition of talent. - As I was going through the village of S.  a boy began
cracking a whip with all his might - he had already advanced far in this
art, and knew it.  I threw him a glance of recognition - in my heart, however, I found it very painful. - So it is with the recognition of many talents.
We are well disposed towards them when they cause us pain.
Laughing and smiling. - The more joyful and secure the spirit becomes, the
more man unlearns loud laughter; on the other hand, a spiritual smile  is
continually welling up in him - a sign of his astonishment at the countless
hidden pleasures existence contains.
Entertainment for invalids. - Just as  grief of soul can  lead  us  to tear at our
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
hair, beat our brows, rend our cheeks or even, as Oedipus did, pluck out
our eyes,  so when we experience violent physical pain we sometimes call
to  our  aid  a  violent  feeling  of  rancour  by  recalling  acts  of  slander  and
inculpation committed against us,  by viewing our future darkly,  by acts
of  malice  and  stabs-in-the-back  we  perpetrate  in  imagination  against
invisible  enemies.  And  occasionally  it  is  true  that  one  devil  drives  out
another - but one then has this other. - Thus what is to be recommended
to the invalid is that other form of entertainment that seems to diminish
the pain:  to reflect on acts of kindness and consideration one might perform for friend and  foe.
Mediocrity as mask.  Mediocrity is the most successful mask the superior
-
spirit can wear, because to the great majority, that is to say the mediocre,
it will not seem a mask - : and yet it is on precisely their account that he
puts  it on - so as  not  to  provoke  them,  indeed  often  out of benevolence
and pity.
The patient. - The pine-tree seems to  listen,  the fir-tree to wait:  and both
without impatience: - they give  no  thought  to  the little people beneath
them  devoured by  their impatience and their curiosity.
The best joke. - The joke I welcome most is that which stands in place of a
weighty, not altogether harmless thought, at once a cautionary gesture of
the finger and a flashing of the eyes.
Accessories of reverence. - Wherever the past is venerated the clean and the
cleaners  should  not be admitted.  Piety  is uncomfortable  without  a little
dust, dirt and refuse.
The great danger for scholars. - It is precisely the ablest and most thoroughgoing scholars who are in danger of seeing their life set narrower and narrower limits  and,  in the feeling that this is so, of becoming in the second half of their  life more  and  more disgruntled and intolerant.  At first they
swim  into  their  science  with  wide  hopes  and  apportion  themselves
bolder tasks whose goals they  sometimes  already anticipate in their imagination:  then there are  moments  such as occur in  the  life of the great discovering sea-voyagers - knowledge,  presentiment and  strength raise
one another even higher,  until a new distant coast dawns upon the eye.
Now,  however,  the  rigorous  man  recognizes  more clearly year by year
how vital it is that the individual items of research  should be as circumscribed  as  possible  so that  they  can be  resolved  without  remainder and that  unendurable  squandering  of  energy  avoided  from  which  earlier
periods  of science  suffered:  every  task  is  done  ten times,  and then  the
T H E   W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S  S H A DOW
eleventh still offers the best result. But the more the scholar gets to know
and practise this resolving of riddles without remainder the greater will
be his pleasure in it: but the strictness of his demands in regard to that
which is here called  'without  remainder'  will likewise increase.  He  sets
aside everything that must in this sense remain incomplete, he acquires a
repugnance and a keen nose for the half-resolvable - for everything that
can yield a kind of certainty only in a general and more indefinite sense.
The plans of his youth collapse before his eyes: all that remains of them is
the  merest few  knots  in  the  unknotting  of which  the master now  takes
pleasure and  demonstrates  his  power.  And now,  in the  midst of all this
useful and  restless activity,  the older man  is suddenly and  then repeatedly assailed by a profound disgruntlement,  by a kind of torment of conscience:  he gazes  upon  himself as upon one transformed,  as though he had  been  diminished,  debased,  changed  into  a  skilful  dwarf;  he  is
harassed by  the  thought  of whether his mastery in small things is not a
piece  of indolence,  an  evasion  of the  admonition  to  greatness  in living
and working.  But he can no longer attain it - the time has gone by.
The teacher in the age of books. - Now that self-education and fraternal education are becoming more general, the teacher must, in the form he now normally  assumes,  become almost  redundant.  Friends anxious  to  learn
who  want to acquire knowledge of something together can  find  in  our
age of books a shorter and more natural way than 'school' and 'teacher'
are.
The great utility of vanity. - Originally the strong individual treats not only
nature but  society  and  weaker  individuals  too as objects of  plunder:  he
exploits them as much as he can and then goes on. Because his life is very
insecure,  alternating between hunger and satiety,  he kills more animals
than he can eat,  and pillages and mistreats men more than is necessary.
His  demonstrations  of  power  are  at  the  same  time  demonstrations  of
revenge  against  the  painful  and  fear-ridden  state  of his  existence:  then
again, he wants through his actions to count as being more powerful than
he  is:  when  the  fear  he  engenders  increases,  his  power  increases.  He
soon notices  that  what bears  him  up  or  throws  him  down  is  not  that
which he is but that which he counts as being: here is the origin of vanity.
The powerful man tries by every means to augment belief in his power. -
Those he subjects,  who tremble before him and serve him,  know in turn
that they are worth precisely as much as he counts them as being worth:
so that it is at this estimation that they work, and not at the satisfaction of
their own needs as such. We know vanity only in its feeblest forms, in its
sublimations and small doses, because we live in a late and very ameliorated state of society: originally it is the most useful of all things, the mightiest means of preservation.  And the degree of vanity will,  moreover, be the
greater the  more  prudent and  intelligent  the  individual  is:  because it is
easier to augment belief in power than to augment power itself, but is so
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
only for him who possesses spirit - or, as must be the case in these primeval conditions,  for him who is cunning and deceitful.
Signs of cultural weather. - There are so few decisive  signs of the cultural
weather we must be glad if we find we have at any rate one reliable one in
our hands for use in our house and garden.  To test whether someone is
one of us or not - I mean whether he is a free spirit or not - one should test
his feelings towards Christianity.  If he stands towards it in any way other
than  critically then  we  turn  our  back  on  him:  he  is  going  to  bring  us
impure air and bad weather. - It is no longer our task to teach such people
what  a  sirocco  is;  they  have  Moses  and  the  weather-prophets  and  the
prophets of the Enlightenment: if they will not pay heed to these,  then -
18J
Wrath and punishment has had its time. - Wrath and punishment is a present
to us  from the  animal  world.  Man will have come of age  only when  he
returns  this birthday gift to the animals.  - Here there  lies buried  one of
the greatest ideas mankind can have, the idea of progress to excel all progress.  - Let  us  go  forward  a  few  thousand  years  together,  my friends!
There is a great deal of joy still reserved for mankind of which men of the
present day have not had so much as a scent!  And we may promise ourselves  this  joy,  indeed  testify that  it  must  necessarily  come  to  us,  only provided  that the evolution of human reason does not stand still! One day
we shall not be able to find it in our heart to commit the logical sin that lies
concealed  in  wrath  and  punishment,  whether  an  individual's  or
society's: one day, when heart and head have learned to dwell as close to
one another as now they still  stand far apart. That they no longer stand as
far  apart  as  they  originally did  is  fairly  apparent if we  look at the  total
course of mankind; and the individual who has behind  him a lifetime of
inner  labour will  have  a  proud  and  joyful  awareness  of distance overcome and closer proximity achieved, and will thus feel entitled to venture to harbour even greater expectations.
Origin of the  'pessismists'. - A  little  decent  food  often  makes all  the  difference to whether we look into the future hopefully or hollow-eyed: this applies even in the highest and most spiritual regions.  When the present
generation  is dissatisfied with  the world and blackens it,  these qualities
have  been  inherited  from  earlier  hungry  generations.  It  is  often  to  be
observed  in  our  artists  and  poets  too  that,  however  luxuriously  they
themselves may live,  their antecedents are not of the best,  that much of
their blood and brain that reemerges as the subject and chosen colours of
their works has been acquired from downtrodden and ill nourished forefathers. The culture of the Greeks is a culture of the wealthy, and of the wealthy from of old moreover:  for a couple  of centuries  they lived better
than  we  (better  in  every  sense,  especially  on  much  simpler  food  and
drink):  as a result their brains  at length  became at once so  full and  deli-
THE  W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
cate, the blood flowed so rapidly through them like a joyful and sparkling
wine, that the good and best things they could do emerged from them no
longer gloomy, enraptured and with violence, but fair and bathed in sunlight.
Of rational death. - What is more  rational,  to stop the  machine when the
work one demands of it has been completed - or to  let it run on  until it
stops of its own accord, that is to say until it is ruined? Is the latter not a
squandering of the cost of maintenance,  a  misuse of the energy and  attentiveness of those who service it? Does it not mean throwing away that which  is  badly  needed  elsewhere?  Will  the  fact  that  many  of them  are
maintained and serviced to no productive end not even propagate a kind
of  contempt  for  machines  in  general?  - I  am  speaking  of  involuntary
(natural) and of voluntary (rational)  death.  Natural death is death independent of all reason, actual irrational death, in which the wretched substance  of  the  husk  determines  how  long  the  kernel  shall  or  shall  not continue  to  exist:  in  which  therefore  the  stunted,  often sick and  thickwitted prison warder is the master who decides the moment at which his noble prisoner shall die.  Natural death is the suicide of nature,  that is to
say  the annihilation of the  rational  being  by  the irrational  to  which  it is
tied.  Only in the light of religion can the opposite appear to be the case:
because  then  it  is  the  higher reason  (God's)  which  gives  the  command
which  the  lower  reason  has,  fairly  enough,  to  submit  to.  Outside  the
religious mode of thinking natural death is worthy of no glorification. -
The wise regulation and disposal of death belongs to that morality of the
future,  at  present  quite  ungraspable  and  immoral  sounding,  into  the
dawn of which it must be an indescribable joy to gaze.
Retrogressive. - All criminals force society back to a stage of culture earlier
than the one at which it happens to be standing: they have a retrogressive
effect. Consider the instruments society is obliged to create and maintain
for itself for the sake of its own defence: the sly police agents, the prison
warders,  the  executioners;  do not  overlook  the  public  prosecutors  and
defence  lawyers;  and  ask  yourself,  finally,  whether  the  judges  themselves,  and  punishment,  and  the  whole  process  of the  courts,  are  not phenomena much more likely to produce a depressive than an elevating
effect on the non-criminal:  for no one will ever succeed in covering selfdefence and revenge with the cloak of innocence; and whenever man is employed  and  sacrificed  as  a  means  to  an  end  of  society's  all  higher
humanity mourns.
War as  remedy.  - To  nations  growing  wretched  and  feeble  war  may  be
recommended as a remedy, assuming they want to continue on living at
all:  for  national  consumption  is  also  susceptible  to  a  brutal  cure.  The
desire to live for ever and inability to die is, however, itself already a sign
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
of senility of the faculties:  the more fully and ably one lives,  the readier
one is to relinquish  one's  life for a  single  good  sensation.  A nation that
lives and feels in this way has no need of wars.
t88
Spiritual and physical  transplantation as  remedy.  - The  various  cultures  are
various spiritual climates each of which is especially harmful or healthful
to this or that organism. History as a whole, as knowledge of the various
cultures,  is pharmacology but not the science of medicine  itself.  The physician  is  still needed  who  will avail himself of this  pharmacology to  send each  person  to the  climate  favourable precisely to  him - for a period  of
time or for  ever.  To live  in  the present, within a  single  culture,  does not
suffice as a universal prescription: too  many people of the  highest utility
who cannot breathe properly in it would die out. With the aid of history
one can give them air and try to preserve them; men of retarded cultures
also have their value. - This spiritual regimen is paralleled by a physical
one through which, by a medicinal geography, mankind has to discover
to what sicknesses and degenerations each region of the earth gives rise,
and conversely what curative factors it offers: and then nations, families
and individuals must gradually be transplanted for as long and continuously as is needed for our inherited physical infirmities to be conquered.
In the end,  the whole earth will be a collection of health resorts.
Reason and  the tree of humanity.  - That which  in  senile  short-sightedness
you  call  the  overpopulation  of the  earth  is  precisely  what  proffers  the
more  hopeful  their greatest task:  mankind  shall  one  day become  a  tree
that  overshadows  the  whole  earth  bearing  many  milliards  of blossoms
that shall all become fruit one beside the other,  and the earth itself shall
be  prepared  for  the  nourishment of this  tree.  That the still small beginnings of this  shall  increase  in  strength  and  sap,  that the  sap  shall  flow around  for  the  nourishment  of  the  whole  and  the  individual  parts
through numberless canals - it is from this and similar tasks that the standard is to be derived as to whether a man of the present is useful or useless. The task is unspeakably great and bold: let us all see to it that the tree does not untimely rot away!  Human life and  action is no doubt capable of
presenting itself to the historical mind in the way in which the life of the
ant,  with  its  cunningly  raised  up  hills,  stands  exposed  to all  our  eyes.
Judged  superficially, all human existence would, like the existence of the
ant, suggest the presence of 'instinct'.  A more rigorous examination lets us
perceive  how  whole  nations,  whole  centuries  toil  to  discover  and
thoroughly  to  test  new  methods  for  promoting a  great  human  collective
and  finally the great collective fruit-tree of humanity; and whatever individuals,  nations  and  ages  may  suffer  in  the  course  of  this  testing, individuals have always become wise and prudent through this suffering,
and wisdom and  prudence  slowly flows out from  them to influence the
measures adopted by whole nations and whole ages.  Even the ants make
mistakes; mankind may well be ruined and untimely wither through folly
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S  S H A D O W
in its choice of methods; neither for the one nor the other is there an infallible instinct.  What we must do, rather, is to look in the face our great task of preparing the earth for the production of the greatest and most joyful
fruitfulness - a task for reason on behalf of reason!
Commendation of unselfishness and its origin. - For many years two  neighbouring petty chieftains had been at strife with one another: they devastated  one  another's  crops,  abducted  sheep,  burned  down  houses;  but neither obtained  a decisive victory over the other,  because  their power
was roughly equal. A third, who because of the secluded situation of his
domain was able to stand aside from this feud but had reason to fear the
day  one  of his  quarrelsome  neighbours  should  come  out  decisively on
top,  finally  stepped  between  the contestants  and  solemnly  offered  his
good offices: and in private he attached to his peace proposal a weighty
condition:  he gave each of them to  understand that henceforth if one of
them offended against the peace he would make common cause with the
other.  They came  together before  him,  hesitantly laid  in his  hands  the
hands that had hitherto been the instruments and all too often the cause
of hatred - and  seriously undertook to attempt to keep  the  peace.  They
both  saw  with  astonishment  how  their  prosperity  and  wellbeing  suddenly increased, how each had in his neighbour a willing trading-partner instead of a crafty or openly mocking illdoer, how each could even assist
and rescue the other in times of need instead of exploiting and augmenting this need of his neighbour as heretofore; it seemed, indeed, as though in both their domains the race of man had grown fairer since that day: for
their eyes had become brighter, their brows had lost their brooding look,
all had acquired confidence in the future - and nothing is so beneficial to
the  soul  and  body  of  man  than  is  this  confidence.  They  met  together
every year on the day of their treaty, the chieftains together with their followers: and did so in the presence of the mediator whose mode of dealing they increasingly admired and revered the greater the benefits they owed
to  it grew.  They  called  this  mode  of dealing  unselfish - their eyes  were
fixed far too firmly on the benefits they themselves had harvested from it
to see of their neighbour more than that his condition had changed  far
less as a  consequence  of it  than  theirs  had: it had,  rather,  remained the
same,  and  thus  it  seemed  that  the  latter  had  had  no  eye  on acquiring
benefits for himself.  For the first time one told oneself that unselfishness
was a virtue: such a thing might, of course, have been practised often and
on a  small scale in private,  but this virtue became  truly noticeable only
when for the first time it was painted on the wall in large letters legible to
the whole community. The moral qualities are recognized as virtues, accorded value and an honoured name, and recommended for acquisition only from the moment when  they have visibly determined  the fate  and
fortune of whole societies: for then height of feeling and excitation of the
inner creative energies has become so great in many that each brings the
best  he  has  and  bestows  it upon  this  quality:  the  serious  man  lays  his
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
seriousness  at its  feet,  the  dignified  man  his  dignity,  the  women  their
gentleness,  the  young  all  the  hopefulness  and  future-directedness  of
their nature; the poet lends it words  and  names,  inserts it in the rounddance of other beings like it,  accords it a pedigree and, as is the way with artists, at last worships  the creature of his fantasy as a new divinity - he
teaches worship  of it.  Thus,  because  the  love  and  gratitude  of  everyone
has worked on it as on a statue, a virtue at last becomes an assemblage of all
that  is  good and  worthy of reverence,  a kind of  temple and  at the same
time  divine  personage.  Henceforth it  stands as an individual virtue,  as a
distinct  entity,  which it was not before,  and exercises  the rights and the
power of something sanctified  and suprahuman.  - In the Greece of later
antiquity  the  cities  were  full  of  such  abstracts  made into  human  deities
(this  bizarre  expression  must be  excused  for the sake of the bizarre concept it describes); the people had in its own way erected for itself a Platonic 'ideational heaven' in the midst of the earth, and I do not believe that its inhabitants were felt to be  less  alive  than any of the old  Homeric divinities.
Times of darkness.  - 'Times of darkness'  is  the  expression  in  Norway for
those times when the sun remains below the  horizon the whole day long:
at these  times the  temperature  falls  slowly but continuously.  - This is a
nice simile for all thinkers for whom the sun of humanity's future has for
a time disappeared.
The philosopher of sensual pleasure.  A little garden,  figs,  little cheeses and
-
in addition three or four good friends - these were the sensual pleasures
of Epicurus.
The epochs of life. - The true epochs in life are those brief periods of standstill between the ascent and decline of a ruling idea or feeling. Here one has attained a state of satisfaction: all else is hunger and thirst - or satiety.
The dream. - Our dreams are, on the rare occasions when they are for once
successful and perfect - usually the dream is a bungled product - chains
of  symbolic  scenes  and  images  in  place  of  the  language  of  poetic  narration; they paraphrase our experiences or expectations or circumstances with  such  poetic boldness and  definiteness that in  the morning  we are
always astonished at ourselves  when we recall our dreams.  In  dreaming
we use up too much of our artistic capacity - and therefore often have too
little of it during the day.
Nature and  science.  - Just as in nature,  so in  science  it  is  the  poorer,  less
fruitful  regions  that  are  first properly cultivated - because  it is  precisely
for  this  that  the  means  available  to  budding  science  are  approximately
T H E   W A N D E RE R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
adequate. The cultivation of the most fruitful regions presupposes a carefully  developed  and  tremendous  quality  of  methods,  individual  conclusions already gained,  and an organized host of well schooled workers
- and all these come together only late in the day. - Impatience and ambition often make too soon for these most fruitful regions; but the results are then almost nil.  In  nature the revenge for such losses would be  that
the colonists starved to death.
The simple life.  - Nowadays  a  simple  mode  of life  is  difficult:  it  requires
much more reflection and inventive talent than is possessed even by very
clever  people.  The  most  honest  of them  will  perhaps  say  moreover:  'I
haven't sufficient time to reflect on it. The simple mode of life is too noble
a goal for me,  I shall wait until wiser men than I have discovered  it.'
Great peaks  and little peaks.  - The  meagre  fruitfulness  of the  highest  and
most cultivated  spirits and  the classes that pertain  to  them,  the  circumstance  that  they are  frequently unmarried  and are  sexually cool in  general,  is  essential  to  the  economy  of  mankind:  reason  recognizes  and makes use of the fact that at the outermost point of spiritual evolution the
danger of a nervously unsound posterity is very great: such people are the
great peaks of mankind - they must not taper off into little peaks.
Nature never makes a leap. - However  vigorously a man may develop and
seem to leap over from one thing into its opposite,  closer observation will
nonetheless discover the dovetailing where the new building grows out of
the old.  This is the task of the biographer:  he always has to bear in mind
the fundamental principle that nature never makes a leap.
Clean, certainly. - He who dresses himself in dean-washed rags is wearing
clean clothes,  certainly, but looks like a ragamuffin nonetheless.
The  solitary  speaks.  As  a  recompense  for  much  ennui,  ill-humour and
-
boredom,  such as a  solitude without friends, books,  duties or passions
must entail, one harvests those quarters of an hour of the deepest immersion  in  oneself  and  in  nature.  He  who  completely  entrenches  himself against boredom also entrenches  himself against himself:  he will never
get to drink the most potent refreshing draught from the deepest well of
his own being.
False celebrity.  - I  hate  those  supposed  beauties  of nature  which  derive
their  significance  fundamentally  only  from  knowledge,  especially  a
knowledge of geography,  but in themselves leave the mind thirsting  for
beauty unsatisfied: for example the view of Mont Blanc  from Geneva - a
thing  without  meaning  unless  knowledge hurry to  assist  the brain;  the
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
mountains closer  to us are  all more beautiful and impressive - but 'not
nearly so high', as that absurd knowledge adds with the aim of diminishing them.  The eye here contradicts knowledge: how can it truly rejoice if its rejoicing is grounded in contradiction!
Pleasure tourists. - They climb the hill like animals, stupid and perspiring;
no one has told them there are beautiful views on the way.
20)
Too much and too little.  Everyone nowadays Jives through too much and
-
thinks through too little: they are ravenously hungry but at the same time
suffer from colic, so that they get thinner and thinner however much they
eat. - He who says nowadays 'I have experienced  nothing' - is an idiot.
End and goal. - Not every end is a goal. The end of a melody is not its goal;
but nonetheless, if the melody had not reached its end it would not have
reached its goal either.  A parable.
Neutrality of grand nature.  The neutrality of grand nature (in mountain,
-
sea,  forest  and  desert)  pleases  us,  but only briefly;  afterwards we grow
impatient.  'Won't  these things  say anything at  all  to  us,  then?  Don't  we
exist  for  them?'  There  arises  the  feeling  of  crimen  laesae  majestatis
humanae. *
Forgetting  our  objectives.  - During  the  journey  we  commonly  forget  its
goal.  Almost every profession is chosen and commenced as a means to an
end but continued as an end in itself. Forgetting our objectives is the most
frequent of all acts of stupidity.
Elliptic of an idea.  When an idea has just risen above the horizon the tem
-
perature of the soul is usually very cold.  The idea engenders its heat only
gradually,  and it is at its hottest (that is to say, it is exercising its greatest
influence) when belief in the idea is already on the decline.
How to have everyone against you. - If anyone  nowadays  ventured  to say:
'he  who  is  not  for  me is against  me',  he  would  at  once  have  everyone
against him. - This way of feeling  does  credit to our age.
Being ashamed of wealth. - Our  age  tolerates only one species of wealthy
man,  him who is ashamed of his wealth.  If we hear of anyone 'he is very
rich',  we at once experience a  sensation  similar to that which we experience at the sight of a repulsive swelling sickness, of obesity or dropsy: we have forcibly to remind ourselves of our humanity if we are to be able to
•  crimen  . . .  humanae: crime of lese majeste against  the  human  race.
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
associate  with  such a wealthy man without his noticing the disgust we
feel.  Should  he go so far as to plume himself on his riches, however,  our
feeling is mingled  with an almost pitying amazement at so high a degree
of human unreason:  so that we feel like raising our hands to heaven and
crying:  'poor  disfigured,  overburdened,  hundredfold  fettered  man,  to
whom  every hour brings or can bring something unpleasant, whose limbs
are set trembling by every event in twenty nations, how can you make us
believe  you  are  happy  in  your  state  of  life!  Wherever  you  appear  in
public, we know it is a kind of running the gauntlet under eyes that have
in them nothing but cold hatred or importunity or silent derision.  It may
be easier for you  to acquire  things  than  it is  for  others:  but your acquisitions are superfluous and give you little pleasure; and to store up what you have acquired is now in any event a more wearisome thing than any
wearisome acquiring could  be.  You  suffer continually,  for  you  lose continually.  What good  is it if you have a  constant supply of  new  artificial blood:  the  cupping-glasses  that  sit,  constantly  sit,  on  your neck are  no
less painful! - But, to be fair to you, it is hard, perhaps impossible, for you
not to be rich: you have to store up, have to go on acquiring, the tendency
of  your  nature  you  have  inherited  is  the  yoke  imposed  upon  you  - so
therefore do not deceive us,  be honestly and visibly ashamed of the yoke
you bear: since at the bottom of your soul you are in fact weary of it and
bear it unwillingly. This shame will not dishonour you.'
Intemperance in presumptuousness.  There are men who are so presump
-
tuous that when they publicly commend something great they know no
other way of doing so than by  representing it as a preliminary stage of
and bridge to themselves.
211  .
In  the ground of ignominy. - He who  wants  to rid men of an idea  usually
does not halt at refuting it and drawing out the worm of illogicality that
resides within  it:  he  then,  after  the  worm  is  dead,  goes  on  to  hurl  the
entire fruit too into the mud,  so that men will find it indecent and experience disgust at it.  He believes that in this way he has found the means of preventing that 'resurrection on the third day' so common among refuted
ideas. - He is in error, for it is precisely in the ground of ignominy, among
the filth, that the kernel of an idea geminates new seeds most speedily.
Therefore: do not deride and befoul that which you want to do away with
for good but respectfully lay it on ice; and, in as much as ideas are very tenacious of life, do so again and again.  Here it is necessary to act in accordance with the maxim:  'One refutation is no refutation.'
Free of morality. - Now that minds are becoming freer and less narrow, it is
certain  that  morality  (inherited,  handed  down,  instinctual  acting  in
accordance with moral feelings) is on the decline: but the individual virtues,
moderation,  justice,  repose  of  soul,  are  not  - for  when  the  conscious
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
mind has attained its highest degree of freedom it is involuntarily led to
them  and  comes  to recognize how useful thay are.
The fanatic of mistrust and his warranty. - The old man: You want to venture
on  the  tremendous  task  of educating  men?  Where  is  your warranty?
Pyrr!to:� Here it is: I shall warn men against myself, I shall confess publicly
all the faults of my nature and expose to every eye my precipitancies, contradictions and  acts of stupidity. Do not listen to me, I shall say to them, until  I  have  become  like  unto  the  least  of you,  and  less even  than  him;
resist  and  strive  against  truth  as long as ever you  can,  out  of disgust  at
him  who  is its advocate.  I  shall  mislead and  deceive  you so long as you
perceive in  me the  slightest trace  of dignity and respectability.  The old
-
man: You promise too much, you cannot bear this burden. - Pyrr!to: Then
I shall tell men this too, and say I am too weak and cannot perform what I
promise. The greater my unworthiness, the more they will mistrust truth
when it proceeds from my mouth. - The old man:  Do you want to be the
teacher of mistrust of truth,  then? - Pyrr!to: Of mistrust such as there has
never yet been on earth before, of mistrust of all and everything. It is the
only path to truth. The right eye may not trust the left, and light will for a
time have to be called darkness:  this is the path you must tread.  Do  not
believe  it will  lead  you  to  fruit-trees  and  fair  meadows.  You  shall  find
hard little grains of corn upon it - these are truths: for many decades you
will have to consume lies by the handful so as not to die of hunger, even
though you know them to be lies. Those grains of corn, however, will be
sown  and buried,  and perhaps,  perhaps,  there  will  at  some  future time
be a harvest-day:  no one dare promise it,  unless he be a fanatic. - The old
man: Friend! Friend! Your words too are those of the fanatic! - Pyrrho: You
are right! I shall be mistrustful of all words. - The old man: Then you will
have to stay silent. - Pyrr!to: I shall tell men that I have to stay silent,  and
that they should mistrust my silence. - The old man: So you are retreating
from your undertaking? - Pyrrho: On the contrary - you have just shown
me the gate through which I must pass. - The old man: I do not know - : do
we still understand one another completely? - Pyrrho: Probably not. - The
old  man:  Do  you  still  understand  yourself  completely?  - Pyrrho  turns
around  and  laughs.  - The old  man:  Alas,  friend!  Laughing  and  staying
silent - is  that  now your whole philosophy? - Pyrrho: It wouldn't be the
worst one. -
European  books.  - When reading Montaigne,  Larochefoucauld,  La Bruyere,  Fontenelle  (especially  the  Dialogues des Morts),  Vauvenargues  and Chamfort we are closer to antiquity than in the case of any other group of
six authors of any other nation. t  Through these six the spirit of the final
•  Pyrrho of Elis (c.  365 to c. 270 BC), founder of the school of philosophical Skepticism. The
conversation  with  the  old  man  is modelled on the dialogue Python written by Pyrrho's pupil
Timon of Phleius (c.  320 to c. 230 BC).
t  La  Bruyere (1645-¢),  Fontenelle (1657-1757), Vauvenargues (1715-47),  Chamfort (1741-
94): French moralists.
T H E   W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H ADOW
centuries of the old era has risen again - together they constitute an important  link  in  the  great,  still  continuing  chain  of  the  Renaissance.  Their books are above the changes of national taste and philosophical colouring
which as a rule every book nowadays radiates and has to radiate if it is to
become famous: they contain more real ideas than all the books of German
philosophers  put  together:  ideas  of  the  kind  that  produce  ideas  and
which - I am at a loss to finish the definition; it is enough that they seem
to me  authors who  have  written  neither  for children  nor for  dreamers,
neither for young ladies nor for Christians,  neither for Germans nor for
I am again at a loss to complete my list.  - But to state a clear commendation:  if  they  had  been  written  in Greek  the  Greeks would  have  understood them. How much, on the other hand, would even Plato have been able to  understand  at  all of the  writings  of our finest  German  thinkers,
those of Goethe and Schopenhauer,  for example,  to  say  nothing of the
repugnance their style would have evoked in him,  namely its obscurity,
exaggeration  and  occasional  thinness  and  dryness - faults  from  which
the above  named suffer least among German  thinkers and yet suffer all
too much (as a thinker Goethe liked to embrace the clouds more than he
should  have  and  it  is  not  with  impunity  that  Schopenhauer  almost
always  wanders  among  images  of  things  instead  of  among  the  things
themselves).  - On  the  other  hand,  what clarity  and  delicate  precision
those Frenchmen possess!  Even the most acute-eared of the Greeks must
have approved of this art, and one thing they would even have admired
and  adored,  the  French  wittiness  of  expression:  they  loved  such  things
very much without themselves being especially gifted in them.
215'
Fashion and  modernity.  - Wherever  ignorance,  uncleanliness and superstition are still the order of the day,  wherever communications are poor, the landscape is meagre and the priesthood powerful,  there we still also
discover national costumes. Where signs of the opposite of these are to be
discovered,  on the other  hand, fashion  reigns.  Fashion  is  thus to be discovered  next  to  the  virtues  of  present-day  Europe:  could  it  actually  be their shadow-side? - In the first place,  male dress that is fashionable and
no longer national says of him who wears it that the European wishes to
cut a figure neither as an individual nor as a member of a class or nation, that
he has made a deliberate quenching of this species of vanity into a law for
himself:  then  that  he is industrious and  has  little time  for dressing and
self-adornment,  likewise that he finds that everything costly and luxurious in material and design accords ill with the work he has to do; finally, that through his costume  he  indicates  the more  learned and intellectual
callings as those to which as a European he stands closest or would like to
stand closest: whereas it is the brigand,  the herdsman or the soldier who
shine  through  the  still  existent  national  costumes  as being  the  leading
and most desirable situations in life. Within this overall character of male
fashion there then exist those little variations produced by the vanity of the
young  men,  the dandies  and  idlers of the big cities, by those,  that is to
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
say,  who have not yet come to maturity as a European. - European women
have done so much less,  which is why with them the variations are much
greater:  they too have no  desire  for national  dress and hate to be recognized as German, French, Russian by their clothing,  but they very much like to make an impression as individuals;  likewise their clothing is supposed to leave no one in any doubt that they belong to one of the more reputable classes (that they are 'respectable' or in the 'world of society'),
and  their  desire  to  create  this  effect  is  indeed  the  stronger  the  more
tenuous,  or  even  illusory,  their  membership of the said classes.  Above
all,  however,  the  young  woman  refuses  to  wear  anything  the  older
woman wears,  because she believes her value will fall if she is thought to
be older than  she  is:  the older woman, conversely,  would like to deceive
as long as she can through more youthful looking costume - as a result of
which contest temporary fashions continually appear in which youthfulness is inescapably  and  inimitably visible.  When  the  inventive spirit of these youthful artists has revelled for a time in such exposures of youthfulness,  or,  to tell the whole truth,  when  the inventive  spirit of ancient courtly  cultures,  of  th�  still  extant  nations  and  of  the  whole  world  of
costume in general has been consulted and the Spanish, the Turkish and
the ancient Greek for instance have been coupled together for the presentation  of these  fair forms,  the  discovery  is invariably made that one has had an ill perception of where one's advantage truly lies; that an effect is
more  readily  produced  upon  men  by  playing  hide-and-seek  with  the
beautiful body than by naked or semi-naked honesty; and then the wheel
of taste and vanity again turns in the opposite direction:  the  somewhat
older young women find they have entered into their kingdom, and the
contest  between  these  most  charming  and  absurdest  of creatures  goes
raging  on  again.  The  more  women  grow  inwardly,  however,  and  cease
among themselves to give precedence to the immature as they have done
hitherto,  the  smaller  these  variations  in  their  costume  and  the  simpler
their adornment will become: as to which a correct judgement would take
its standards,  not from  the models of antiquity,  not,  that is to  say,  from
the  garments  worn by  southerly sea-dwellers,  but paying regard  to the
climatic conditions obtaining in northern and central Europe, the regions
in which the inventive genius of Europe now has its preferred homeland.
- On the whole, therefore, it is not change that will characterize fashion and
the modern,  for change is a  sign of backwardness and that the men  and
women of Europe are still immature: what will characterize it is repudiation
of national, class and individual vanity. One must, consequently, approve because  it  economizes  on  time  and  energy-if  individual  cities  and regions of Europe undertake to reflect and devise on behalf of all the rest
in  the  matter  of  clothing,  inasmuch  as  a  sense  of  form  has  not  been
bestowed on everyone;  likewise,  so long as these variations  continue to
exist  it is really  no excessive ambition if Paris, for example, lays claim to
being  the  sole inventor and  innovator in this  realm.  If,  out of hatred for
this  claim  by  a  French  city,  a  German  elects  to  dress  differently,  as
Albrecht Durer dressed for example, let him consider that the costume he
THE  W A N D E RE R   A N D   H I S  S H A D O W
is wearing,  though  Germans  formerly  wore  it,  they invented  it just as
little  as  they  invented  the  fashions  of Paris  - there  has  never  been  a
costume which denoted a German as a German; he should also consider
what he looks like in this costume and whether the really modern mind,
with  all  the  lines  and  folds  the  nineteenth  century  has inscribed  in  it,
might  not  take exception to  someone's  wearing clothes  like  Durer's.  -
Here,  where  the  concepts  'modern'  and  'European'  are  almost  equivalent, what is understood by Europe comprises much more territory than geographical  Europe,  the  little  peninsula  of  Asia:  America,  especially,
belongs  to  it,  insofar  as  it  is  the  daughter-land  of our  culture.  On  the
other  hand,  the  cultural  concept  'Europe'  does  not  include  all  of geographical  Europe;  it  includes  only  those  nations  and  ethnic  minorities who possess a common past in Greece, Rome, Judaism, and Christianity.
'German virtue'. - It cannot be denied that from the beginning of the last
century on a stream of moral awakening has flowed through Europe.  It
was only  then that virtue again became eloquent; it taught men to discover  unforced  gestures  of  exaltation  and  emotion,  it  ceased  to  be ashamed of itself and devised philosophies and poems for its own glorification.  If we seek the source of this stream we find first of all Rousseau, but the mythical Rousseau constructed out of the impression produced
by his writings - one might almost say, out of his mythically expounded
writings - and out of the indications he himself provided ( - he and his
public worked continually on this ideal figure). Its other origin lies in that
resurrection of the Stoicism of the greatest days of Rome through which
the  French  have  continued  on  in  the  worthiest  way  the  task  of  the
Renaissance.  From a gloriously successful imitation of the forms of antiquity  they went on  to  an  imitation  of its  characters:  so  that  they will always have a right to the highest honours as the nation which has up to
now  given  modern  mankind  its  finest  books  and  its  finest  men.  How
these two models - the mythical Rousseau and the reawakened  spirit of
Rome - affected their weaker neighbours can be observed especially in
the case of Germany: which,  as the result of a novel and wholly unprecedented  impetus  to  seriousness  and  greatness  in  willing  and  selfcommand, was at last consumed with amazement at its own new virtue and cast into the world  the concept 'German virtue' as though nothing
more primeval than this had ever been inherited. The first great men who
transfused  to  themselves  that  French  stimulus  to  greatness  and  consciousness of moral will were more honest and did not forget where gratitude  lay.  The  moralism  of Kant - whence  does  it  come?  He  gives  the answer again and again: from Rousseau and the reawakened Stoicism of
Rome.  The moralism of Schiller: the same source, the same glorification
of the  source.  The  moralism  in tones  of Beethoven:  it is  the everlasting
hymn of praise of Rousseau,  of the French revivers of antiquity, and of
Schiller. It was 'German youth' that first forgot gratitude, for in the meantime  men had given ear to the preachers of francophobia:  that German
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
youth  which  for  a  time  stepped  into  the  foreground  with  more  selfconfidence  than  is  considered  permissible  in  other  youths.  When  this youth  sought  after  its  forefathers  it was  no  doubt  right  to  think  of  the
proximity  to  Schiller,  Fichte*  and  Schleiermacher:  but  it  ought  to  have
looked  for its grandfathers  in Paris and  Geneva,  and it was  very  shortsighted  of it to  believe  what  it in  fact believed:  that virtue was  no  more than  thirty  years  old.  In  those  days  they  accustomed  themselves  to
demanding that the word  'German'  should quite casually inspire a misunderstanding  of  the  nature  of  virtue:  and  we  have  not  quite  disaccustomed  ourselves to it even to the present day. - Incidentally,  this said moral awakening resulted,  it almost goes without saying,  only in disadvantages  and  retrogression  for  knowledge of moral phenomena.  What is the whole of German moral philosophy  from Kant onwards,  with all its
French, English and Italian branches and parallels? A semi-theological assault on Helvetius and a rejection of the  open views or signposts to the right path which,  gained by long and wearisome struggle,  he at last assembled and gave adequate expression to. Helvetius is in Germany to the present day the most reviled of all good moralists and good men.
Classic and romantic. - Both those spirits of a classical and those of a romantic  bent - these  two  species exist at  all  times  - entertain  a vision of the future: but  the former do so out of a strength of their age,  the latter out of
its weakness.
The  machine  as  teacher.  - The  machine  of  itself  teaches  the  mutual  cooperation of hordes of men in operations where  each man has to do only one thing:  it provides the model for the party apparatus and the conduct
of warfare.  On the other hand,  it does not teach individual autocracy:  it
makes of many one machine and of every individual an instrument to one
end. Its most generalized effect is to teach the utility of centralization.
Not settled. - We like to live in a small town; but from time to time it is precisely  the  small  town  that  drives  us  out  into  the  deepest  solitudes  of veiled  and  mysterious  nature:  it does  so  when it has again become too
transparent to us. Finally,  to recover from this nature in turn we go to the
big city.  One or two draughts of the latter - and we taste the dregs of its
cup - and  the circle  that  starts  with  the small town begins over again.  -
This  is  the  life  of  modern  men:  they  are  in  everything  somewhat  too
thorough to be settled, like the men of other ages.
Reaction  against  machine-culture.  - The  machine,  itself  a  product  of  the
highest intellectual energies,  sets  in motion in those  who serve it almost
nothing but the lower, non-intellectual energies. It thereby releases a vast
quantity of energy in general that would otherwise lie dormant, it is true;
• Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814): German philosopher.
)66
T H E  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S  S H A D O W
but  it  provides  no  instigation  to  enhancement,  to  improvement,  to
becoming an artist.  It makes men active and uniform - but in the long run
this  engenders  a  counter-effect,  a  despairing boredom  of  soul,  which
teaches them to long for idleness in all its varieties.
The perilousness of the Enlightenment. - All the semi-insanity, histrionicism,
bestial  cruelty,  voluptuousness,  and especially  sentimentality  and  selfintoxication,  which  taken  together constitutes  the actual substance of  the Revolution  and  had,  before  the  Revolution,  become  flesh  and  spirit  in
Rousseau - this creature then went on with perfidious enthusiasm to set
the Enlightenment too on its fanatical head,  which thereby itself began to
glow as though  in a transfigured light: the Enlightenment,  which is fundamentally  so  alien  to  the  Revolution  and,  left  to  itself,  would  have passed quietly along like a gleam in the clouds and for long been content
to address itself only to the individual: so that it would have transformed
the customs and institutions of nations only very slowly. Now, however,
tied  to  a  violent  and  impulsive  companion,  the  Enlightenment  itself
became  violent  and  impulsive.  Its  perilousness  has  thereby  become
almost greater than the liberating illumination it brought to the great revolutionary  movement.  He  who grasps  this  will  also  know  out  of what compound it has to be extracted, of what impurity it has to be cleansed: so
as  then  to  continue  the  work  of  the  Enlightenment  in  himself,  and  to
strangle the Revolution at birth, to make it not happen.
Passion  in  the Middle Ages.  - The  Middle Ages are the era  of the greatest
passions.  Neither antiquity  nor  our own  age  possesses  this  breadth  of
soul:  its  spaciousness  has  never  been  greater  and  never  have  men
measured on a larger scale.  The jungle physique of the barbarian and the
over-soulful,  over-wakeful,  hecticly glittering eyes of the disciple of the
Christian mysteries,  extreme childishness and youthfulness and likewise
extreme over-ripeness and weariness of age, the savagery of the beast of
prey and the effeminacy and tenuousness of the spirit of late antiquity at that time all  these not infrequently came together in a  single person: when he got into a passion,  the heart's current had to spread more violently, its eddies whirl more rapidly, its falls be more precipitate than ever before. - We modern men should be happy to have sustained some loss
in this domain.
Plunder .md economy. - All spiritual movements as a consequence of which
the great hope to be able to plunder and the small to economize go forward.
That, for example,  is why the German Reformation went forward.
Rejoicing souls. - Whenever drink,  drunkenness and ill-smelling lewdness
beckoned, even from afar, the souls of the ancient Germans rejoiced - at
other times they were morose; but of these they had, in their own way, a
profound appreciation.
H U M A N ,   A L L   T O O  H U M A N
Debauchery in Athens. - Even when the fishmarket of Athens had acquired
its  thinkers and  poets,  Greek  debauchery  still  wore a more  refined and
idyllic appearance than  Roman or German ever did. The voice of Juvenal
would  there  have  sounded  like  a  hollow  trumpet:  a  polite  and  almost
childlike laughter would have been the response to it.
Greek prudence.  - Since  the  desire  for  victory  and  eminence  is  an  inextinguishable trait of nature, older and more primitive than any respect for and joy in equality,  the Greek state sanctioned gymnastic and artistic contest  between  equals,  that  is to say marked off an arena where that drive could  be  discharged  without  imperilling  the  political  order.  With  the
eventual decline of the gymnastic and artistic contest the Greek state disintegrated into inner  turmoil.
'Eternal Epicurus'. - Epicurus has been alive at all times and is living now,
unknown to  those who have  called  and  call themselves Epicureans,  and
enjoying no reputation among philosophers.  He has,  moreover,  himself
forgotten  his own name: it was the heaviest pack he ever threw off.
Style of superiority. - Student-German, the dialect of the German student,
has its  origin  among  those  students  who do  not  study  and  who know
how to attain a kind of ascendency over their more serious colleagues by
exposing  everything  that  is  masquerade  in  education,  decency,  erudition,  orderliness,  moderation,  and,  though  employing  the  terms  belonging  to  these  domains  just  as  continually  as  their  better  and  more learned colleagues,  do so with malice in their eyes and an accompanying
grimace. It is in this language of superiority - the only one original to Germany - that  our statesmen and  newspaper critics too now involuntarily speak; it is a continual resort to ironical imitation, a restless, discontented
furtive squinting to left and right, a German of quotation-marks and grimaces.
The buried.  We  withdraw  into concealment: but not out of any kind of
-
personal  ill-humour,  as  though  the  political  and  social  situation  of  the
present day were not good enough for us, but because through our withdrawal we want to economize  and  assemble forces of which culture will later have great need,  and more so if this present remains this present and
as such fulfils its task. We are accumulating capital and seeking to make it
secure: but, as in times of great peril, to do that we have to bury it.
2JO
Tyrants of the  spirit.  - In  our  age  anyone  who  was  so  completely  the
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
expression of a single moral trait as are the characters of Theophrastus• or
Moliere would be regarded as sick and one would in his case speak of an
'idee fixe'. The Athens of the third century would, if we could pay it a visit,
seem to us populated by fools. Nowadays the democracy of concepts rules
in every head - many together are master: a single concept that wanted to be
master would now, as aforesaid, be called an 'idee fixe'. This is our way of
disposing of tyrants - we direct them to the madhouse.
Most dangerous form  of  emigration.  - In  Russia  there  is  an  emigration  of
intelligence: one crosses the frontier to read and write good books. In this
way, however, one helps to turn the spirit of the deserted fatherland into
the extended jaws of Asia that would like to devour little Europe.
.
The state-worshippers.  The almost religious love the Greeks felt for their
-
kings passed over to the polis when kings came to an end. And because a
concept can endure more love than a person,  and as in particular it gives
offence to  its lover less  often  than  people  who are loved  do  ( - for  the
more  they  know  they  are  loved  the  more  inconsiderate  they  usually
become, until in the end they are no longer worthy of love and a rupture
occurs),  reverence for the polis and state was greater than reverence for
princes  had  ever  been.  The  Greeks  are  the  state-worshippers  of ancient
history - in modern history that role is played by other nations.
Against  neglecting the eyes.
Could  a  diminution  of eyesight  every  ten
-
years  not  perhaps  be  demonstrated  in  the  educated  classes of England
who read the Times?
Great works and great faith.  This man had the great works but his com
-
panion had the great faith in these works. They were inseparable: but it
was obvious that the former depended wholly on the latter.
The socialiser. - 'I am not fond of myself', someone said in explanation of
his love of society.  'Society's stomach is stronger than mine, it can digest
me.'
Closing the eyes of one's mind. - Even if one is accustomed to and practised
in  reflecting  on  one's  actions,  when  one  is  actually  acting  (though  the
action be no more than writing a letter or eating and drinking) one must
nonetheless close one's inward eye.  In conversation with average men,
indeed, one must understand how to think with the eyes of one's thinking  closed  - so  as  to  attain  and  thus  comprehend  the  average  man's
•  Theophrastus:  Greek  Peripatetic  philosopher  (372-288  BC).  He  began  as  Plato's  pupil,
and  succeeded Aristotle  as  President  of  the  School;  his  Characters  attempts  a  typology of
human characteristics.
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
thinking. This closing of the eyes is a perceptible act achievable by an act
of will.
The most fearful revenge. - If one wants to revenge oneself on an opponent
as completely as possible one should wait until one has a complete set of
truths and justifications in one's hand and can play them out against him
with composure: so that exacting revenge and exacting justice coincide. It
is  the  most  fearful  kind  of revenge:  for  there  is  no  instance above  it  to
which an  appeal can  be made. That was  how Voltaire revenged himself
on Piron, with five lines that condemn his entire life and work: as many
truths  as there are  words;  that is how he revenged  himself on Friedrich
the Great  (in a letter to  him from Ferney).
Luxury tax. - People buy their necessities in shops and have to pay dearly
for  them  because  they  have  to  assist  in paying for what is also on sale
there but only rarely finds purchasers: the luxury and amusement goods.
So it is that luxury continually imposes  a  tax on the simple people who
have to do without it.
Why beggars go on living. - If alms were bestowed only out of pity all the
beggars would have starved to death.
Why beggars go on living. - The greatest bestower of alms is cowardice.
How the thinker uses a conversation. - Without being a listener it is still possible to hear a great deal provided one knows how to see well yet also how to lose sight of oneself for the time being.  But people do not know how to
make use of a conversation;  they pay much too much attention to what
they themselves intend to say in response, whereas the true listener often
contents himself with a brief answer,  plus a little for politeness' sake, by
way  of  speech,  while  on  the  other  hand  bearing away  in  his  retentive
memory  all the other has said,  together with  the tone and gestures with
which he said it. - In the normal conversation each thinks he is leading the
way,  as if two ships sailing side by side and now and then gently bumping  into  one another each faithfully believed  the neighbouring ship was following or even being pulled along by it.
The art of apologizing. - If anyone apologizes to us he has to do so very well:
otherwise we can easily feel that we ourselves are the guilty party and are
affected  unpleasantly.
Impossible company. - The ship of your thoughts moves too deep for you to
be  able  to  sail  in  it  on  the  waters  of  these  decent,  friendly,  amicable
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S  S H A D O W
people.  There  are  too  many shallows  and  sandbanks  there:  you  would
have  to  turn  and  twist  and  would  be  in  constant  embarrassment,  and
soon they too would be in  embarrassment - over your embarrassment,
whose cause they cannot divine.
Fox of foxes. - A  true  fox calls sour not only those grapes he is unable to
reach but also those he has reached and deprived others  of.
With our closest acquaintances. - However closely people may belong to one
another their common horizon nonetheless still includes all four points of
the compass, and there are times when they notice this.
The silence of disgust. - Someone undergoes,  as  thinker and  man,  a profound  transformation  and  bears  public  witness  to  it.  And  his  hearers notice nothing!  believe him to be just as he was! - This common experience has already disgusted many writers: they had had too great a respect for the intellectuality of men, and when they perceived their error vowed
themselves to silence.
Occupied  seriously.  - The  occupations  of  many  rich  and  noble  men  are
their way of recuperating from  habitual  and too protracted leisure:  that is
why they take them as seriously and intensely as other people take their
rare leisure hours and hobbies.
Ambiguity of the �es. - Just as a sudden,  scaly trembling passes over the
water at your feet, so there are in the human eyes too similar sudden uncertainties and ambiguities which make one ask: is it a shudder of dread?
is it a smile? is it both?
Positive and negative. - This thinker needs no one to refute him:  he does
that for himself.
Revenge for empty nets. - One should beware of anyone who is filled with
the embitterment of the fisherman who after a hard  day's  work  returns
home in the evening with empty nets.
Not  to assert  one's  rights.  - To  exercise  power  costs  effort  and  demands
courage. That is why so many fail to assert rights to which they are perfectly entitled - because a right is a kind of power but they are too lazy or too cowardly to exercise it. The virtues which cloak these faults are called
patience and forbearance.
Light-bearers. - There would be no sunshine in society if the born flatterers
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
and  wheedlers,  I  mean  the  so-called  amiable,  did  not  bring  it in with
them.
At one's most charitable. - When a man has just been greatly honoured and
has eaten a little he is at his most charitable.
Towards the light. - Men press towards the light, not so as to see better, but
so as to shine better. - Him before whom we shine we are glad to regard
as light.
Hypochondriacs. - The hypochondriac is a man with just enough spirit and
pleasure  in  spirit  to  take his sufferings,  his disadvantages,  his faults in
earnest: but the region in which  he feeds himself is too small; he crops it
so fine that in the end he has to look for individual blades of grass. In this
way he finally becomes a curmudgeon and miser - and only then is he
unendurable.
Restitution.  - Hesiod  advises  us  that,  when  a  neighbour  has  helped  us
out, we should restore to him what he has given us in generous measure,
and where possible more abundantly,  as soon as we can.  For in this way
our neighbour is gratified, since his former generosity has proved profitable to him,  but we too are also gratified,  inasmuch as by giving back a little more  than we received we  have  repurchased  the little humiliation
we incurred  through having to be helped out.
More subtle  than  necessary.  - Our capacity for observing  whether others
perceive our weakness is much more subtle than our capacity for observing  the  weaknesses  of others:  from  which it  therefore  follows  that it is more subtle than it needs to be.
A light kind of shadow. - Close beside dark and gloomy men there is to be
found, almost as a rule and as though tied to them, a soul of light. It is as it
were the negative shadow they cast.
Can we refrain from revenge? - There are so many refined forms of revenge
that  one  who  had  occasion  to  revenge  himself  could  at bottom  do  or
refrain from doing whatever he liked:  all the world would in time nonetheless come to believe that he had revenged himself. Not to revenge himself is thus an option scarcely open to a man: he may not even say that he does  not  want to do so,  since  contemptuously to refrain from revenge is
considered  and felt to  be  a  sublime,  very  grievous  form  of  revenge.  -
From which it follows that one ought not to do anything superfluous - -
THE  W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
Error  in  honouring.  - Everyone  believes  he  is  saying  something  to  the
honour of a thinker and  pleasant for him to hear if he indicates how he
himself has hit upon precisely the same ideas as the  thinker's and even
upon  the  same  form  of  expression;  and  yet  the  thinker  is  seldom
delighted at such communications: often they make him distrust his ideas
and their form of expression, and he secretly resolves to revise both. - If
one wishes to honour somebody, one must guard against expressions of
agreement: they set both parties on the same level. - In many instances it
is a matter of social propriety to listen to an opinion as though it were not
our  own,  as  though  indeed  it  belonged  outside  our  horizon:  as,  for
example,  when  an  elderly  man of long  experience  for once  opens  to  us
the  shrine of his accumulated knowledge.
Letter. - A letter is an unannounced visit,  the postman the agent of rude
surprises.  One ought to reserve an hour a week for receiving letters and
afterwards take a bath.
Prejudiced.
Someone  said:  I  have  been  prejudiced  against  myself  ever
-
since I was a child: that is why I find some truth in all blame and some stupidity in all praise. I usually esteem praise too little and blame too highly.
Path to equality. - A few hours' mountain  climbing make of a rogue and a
saint two fairly equal creatures. Tiredness is the shortest path to equality
and fraternity - and sleep finally adds to  them liberty.
Slander.
If  one  encounters  a  truly  infamous  accusation,  one  should
-
never seek its origin among one's simple and straightforward enemies; for
if they were  to  invent  anything  of the sort about us they  would,  as our
enemies, inspire no belief.  But those to whom we have for a time been of
most use but who have for any reason secretly decided there is nothing
more they need demand of us - people such as these are in a position to
put  the  infamy  into  circulation:  they  inspire  belief  firstly  because  it  is
assumed  they would  invent  nothing that could  injure  them themselves,
then because they have come to know us more intimately. - He who has
been thus sorely slandered may console himself with the reflection: slanders are other people's illnesses that have broken out on your body; they demonstrate that society is a  (moral) body,  so  that you can undertake a
cure on yourself that will be of benefit to others.
The child's Kingdom of Heaven. - The happiness of the child is just as mythical as the happiness of the Hyperboreans* of whom the Greeks related. If
•  Hyperboreans: 'the people living beyond the north wind', represented  in  Greek legend as
enjoying a utopian existence; Nietzsche later refers to free spirits as 'we Hyperboreans'.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
happiness dwells on earth at all,  thought the latter, then it is certainly as
far away from us as it can be, perhaps yonder at the edge of the earth.
This is likewise the view of older people: if man can be happy at all then it
is certainly as far away from our age as it can be,  at the border-line and
beginnings of life.  For many people the sight of children viewed through
the  veil  of this myth is  the greatest happiness of which they can partake;
they  themselves  enter  the  forecourt  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  when
they say 'suffer little children to come unto me,  for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven'.  - Wherever  in  the  modern  world  there  is  some  degree  of
sentimentality  the  myth of the  child's  Kingdom of Heaven is  somehow
active.
The impatient. - It is precisely he who is becoming who cannot endure the
state  of becoming:  he  is  too impatient for  it.  The youth refuses  to  wait
until,  after long study,  suffering and deprivation,  his picture of men and
things  is  completed:  instead  he  accepts  on  trust  another  that  stands
finished  and  is offered  to  him  as  though  it  is bound  to  provide  him  in
advance  with the lines  and colours of his picture; he casts himself on to
the bosom of a philosopher or poet and then has for long to deny himself
and serve as a  vassal.  He learns much in the  process: but often a youth
forgets while doing so  what is  most worth  learning and knowing:  himself; he remains a partisan all his life. Alas, much boredom has to be overcome,  much  sweat expended,  before we  discover  our own  colours,  our own  brush,  our  own  canvas! - And  even  then  we  are  far  from being a
master  of our own art of living - but at least we are  master in our own
workshop.
There  are  no  educators.  - As  a  thinker  one  should  speak  only  of  selfeducation. The education of youth by others is either an experiment carried out on an as yet unknown and unknowable subject, or a levelling on principle  with  the  object  of making  the  new  being,  whatever  it  may  be,
conform  to the customs and  habits  then  prevailing:  in both cases therefore something unworthy of the thinker, the work of those elders and teachers whom a man of rash honesty once described as nos ennemis naturels.
- One day,  when one has long since been educated as the world understands it, one discovers oneself: here begins the task of the thinker; now the time has come to call on him for assistance - not as an educator but as one
who has educated himself and who thus knows how it is done.
Pity for  youth.  - We  are  greatly  distressed  if  we  hear  that  a  youth  has
already  lost his  teeth or has become blind.  If we knew all that is irreparable  and  hopeless  in  his  whole  being  how  much  greater  our  distress would be! - Why is it really that we suffer over this? Because youth is supposed  to  continue  what  we  have  begun,  and  every  diminution  of  its powers will be harmful to our work when it devolves upon it. It is distress
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   SHADOW
that our immortality should be so ill guaranteed: or, if we feel ourselves to
be  only  fulfillers  of the  mission  of  mankind,  distress  that  this  mission
must pass into hands weaker than ours.
The ages of life. - The comparison of the four seasons of the year with  the
four ages of life is a piece of worthy silliness.  Neither the first twenty nor
the last twenty years of life correspond to a season of the year: assuming,
that is, that the said comparison is not supposed to refer merely to white
hair and white snow and similar colour effects. The first twenty years are
a preparation  for life as a  whole,  for  the entire life-year,  and are thus a
kind of protracted New Year's Day; and the last twenty oversee,  absorb,
order and codify whatever has been experienced previously: just as, on a
small scale, one does with the preceding year every New Year's Eve.  Between  these,  though,  there  does  lie a  space  of time which  can  to  some extent be  compared  with  the  seasons of the  year:  the  time between  the
twentieth and the fiftieth years (to reckon wholesale in decades - it goes
without saying that each individual must refine these crude calculations
in accordance with his own experience). These three times ten years correspond to three seasons:  summer,  spring and autumn - human life does not have a winter, unless one wants to call those cold recurring seasons of
solitude,  hopelessness  and  unfruitfulness,  our  periods  of illness,  the
winter seasons  of man.  The twenties:  hot,  burdensome,  thundery, voluptuous,  wearying;  years  in  which  we  praise  the  day  in  the  evening when it is over with and  mop our brow as we do so; years in which we
regard work as hard but necessary - these years of our twenties are the
summer of life. The thirties, on the other hand, are its spring: the air now
too warm,  now  too  cold,  always disturbing and  provoking;  sap,  abundance of leaves,  odour of blossom rising everywhere;  many enchanting nights and mornings, the work to which the singing of birds awakens us
a true labour of love,  a kind of enjoyment of our own vigour,  enhanced
by  present  pleasure  in  future  expectations.  Finally,  the  forties:
mysterious,  like  everything  stationary;  resembling a  high,  wide  mountain plateau wafted by a fresh breeze; above it a clear, cloudless sky which gazes down all day and into the night with the same unchanging gentleness: the time of harvest and the heartiest cheerfulness - it is the autumn of life.
The female mind in contemporary society. - Whilt women nowadays think of
the male mind can be divined from the fact that when they adorn themselves  the last thing they have  in  mind  is  to emphasize  the intellectual qualities of their face: they conceal them, rather, and prefer - for example
by  a  certain  arrangement  of  the  hair  over  the  forehead  - to  give  the
impression of a lively and lustful sensuality and  mindlessness,  and this
especially  when  they  possess  little  of  these  qualities.  Their  conviction
that men are terrified of intellect in a woman is so firm that they are even
ready to  deny  they  have any  sharpness  of mind at  all  and  deliberately
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
impose on themselves a reputation for shortsightedness; their objective, no
doubt, is to make men more confiding and trusting: it is though a gentle,
inviting  twilight were spread all around them.
Great and  transitory.  - It moves the observer to tears  to see  the admiring
look of happiness with which a  pretty young wife  gazes up at her husband.  One is filled with autumnal melancholy to think of the greatness as well as the transitoriness of human happiness.
Sacrificial disposition. - Many a woman  has an intelletto del sacrifizio* and
can  no  longer enjoy life  when  her husband refuses to  sacrifice  her:  she
then no longer knows where to  direct her mind,  and changes unawares
from the sacrificial beast  into the sacrificial priest.
The  unwomanly.  - 'Stupid  as  a  man'  say  the  women:  'cowardly  as  a
woman'  say the men.  Stupidity is in woman the unwomanly.
Male and female temperament and mortality. - That the male sex has a worse
temperament than the female is also  evidenced  in the fact that male children  are  more  exposed  to  mortality  than  female,  plainly  because  they more  easily  'blow  their top': their wildness  and  quarrelsomeness easily
exacerbates every ill into something fatal.
The age of cyclopean  building.  - The  democratization  of Europe  is irresistible: for whoever tries to halt it has to employ in that endeavour precisely the  means  which  the  democratic  idea  first  placed  in  everyone's  hands
and makes these means themselves more wieldy and effective: and those
who  oppose  democracy  most  on  principle  (I  mean  the  spirits  of revolution) appear to exist merely to impel the various parties ever faster forwards along the  democratic  path  through  the  fear they  inspire.  Yet one can in fact feel anxious for those who are working consciously and honestly for this future: there is something desolate and monotonous in their faces, and grey dust seems to have got even into their brain. Nonetheless,
it is possible that posterity will one day laugh at this anxiety of ours and
regard  the democratic work of a succession of generations somewhat as
we regard the building of stone dams and protective walls - as an activity
that necessarily gets a lot of dust on clothes and faces and no doubt also
unavoidably  makes  the  workers  a  little  purblind  and  stupid;  but  who
would wish such a work undone on that account! The democratization of
Europe is,  it seems,  a  link in the chain of those tremendous prophylactic
measures which  are  the  conception of modern  times  and  through  which
we separate ourselves from the Middle Ages.  Only  now  is it the age  of
cyclopean building! We finally secure  the foundations, so that the whole
•  intelletto del sacrifizio:  the spirit of sacrifice
THE  W A N D E R E R   A N D  H I S   S H A DOW
future can safely build upon them! We make it henceforth impossible for
the fruitful fields of culture again to be destroyed overnight by wild and
senseless torrents! We erect stone dams and protective walls against barbarians, against pestilences, against physical and spiritual enslavement! And all this coarsely and literally at first,  but gradually in a higher and more
spiritual  sense,  so  that  all  the  measures  here  indicated  seem  to  be  an
inspired collective preparation for the supreme artist of horticulture, who
will be able to apply himself to his real task only when these preparations
have been  fully carried out! - To  be  sure,  given the great length of time
which  lies between  means  and  end,  and  given  the  very great effort of
mind and body,  an effort spanning the centuries,  needed even to create
or procure each one of these means, we must not hold it too much against
those who are working on the present-day if they loudly decree that the
wall and the trellis are the end and final goal; since no one,  indeed,  can
yet see the gardener or the fruit-trees for whose sake the trellis exists.
The right of universal suffrage. - The people did not give themselves universal suffrage; wherever it is now in vogue it has been bestowed upon them and they have provisionally accepted it: in any event, they have the right
to  hand  it  back  if it  does  not  come  up  to  their  expectations.  And  this
seems everywhere now to be the  case:  for if whenever the occasion for
using the vote arises hardly two-thirds of those entitled to vote, perhaps
indeed not even a majority of them, come to the ballot-box, this is a vote
against the entire voting-system as such. - An even sterner judgement is,
indeed, justified here.  A law which decrees that the majority shall have
the decisive voice in  determining  the wellbeing of all cannot be erected
upon  a  foundation  which  is  first  provided  by  that  law  itself;  an  even
broader foundation is necessarily required, and this is the unanimity of all.
Universal  suffrage  may  not  be  an  expression  of the  will  merely of the
majority: the whole country must desire it. The objection of even only a
very small minority must thus suffice to render it invalid and to abolish it:
and non-participation in an election constitutes precisely such an objection
and  thus  brings  about  the  downfall  of  the  entire  voting-system.  The
'absolute veto' of the individual or, not to trivialize the problem, the veto
of a  few  thousand  hangs  over  this  system  as a  requirement of justice:
whenever it is employed it must first be demonstrated by the nature of
the participation whether or not it is still valid.
Bad reasoning.  - How  badly we reason  in  domains  where  we  are not  at
home,  however  well  we  may  be  accustomed  to  reasoning  as  men  of
science!  It is  disgraceful!  But  it is  also  clear  that  in  the  great  world,  in
affairs of politics, it is precisely this bad reasoning that arrives at decisions
on  all  those  sudden and  pressing questions  such as arise  almost every
day: for no one is completely at home in that which has newly developed
overnight;  all  political  thinking,  even  in  the  case  of the  greatest  statesmen, is random improvization.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
Premises of the machine age. - The press,  the machine,  the railway, the telegraph  are  premises  whose  thousand-year  conclusion  no  one  has  yet dared to  draw.
A brake on culture. - Whenever we hear: in that place the men have no time
for  productive  occupations;  weapon-practice  and  parades  occupy  their
days, and the rest of the population have to feed and clothe them; but the
costume they wear is striking, often brightly coloured and full of amusing
follies; few distinguishing qualities are recognized, individuals resemble
one another more than they do elsewhere, or if they do not are treated as
though they  did;  yet they demand and  accord  obedience without understanding:  they  command  but  take  care  not  to  persuade;  they  have  few punishments,  but  these  few  are  harsh  and  are  quickly  carried  to  their
dreadful  last  extremity;  treason is accounted the  greatest of crimes,  and
even criticism  of ills and wrongs  is ventured on only by the  most courageous;  human  life  is cheap  there,  and  ambition  often  assumes a  form that involves putting one's life in danger; - whenever we hear all this we
say at once:  'it is a picture of a barbaric, endangered society'. Perhaps one of
us may add: 'it is a description of Sparta'; another,  however, will reflect a
little and opine that what has been described is our modern military machine
existing in the midst of our differently constituted culture and society as a
living anachronism,  as a picture,  as aforesaid,  of a barbaric,  endangered
society,  as  a posthumous  work of the  past which for  the  wheels of the
present can have only the value of a brake. - Sometimes,  however, a culture is in the greatest need of a brake:  namely,  when it is going too fast downhill or, as in the present case perhaps,  too fast uphill.
More respect for those who know! - Given the present competitive nature of
selling,  the public is necessarily the judge of the product of work: but the
public has no particular specialist knowledge and judges according to the
appearance  of  quality.  As  a  consequence,  the  art  of  producing  an
appearance  (and  perhaps  that  of  developing  taste)  is  bound  to  be
enhanced,  and  the  quality  of the  product  to  decline,  under  the  dominance of the competitive market.  Consequently,  if we are to continue to be reasonable we shall at some time have to put an end to this competitive
market and replace it with a different principle. Only the skilled producer
of the product ought to be the judge of the product, and the public ought
to rely on their faith in him and his integrity.  Therefore, no anonymous
work!  At  the  very  least  a  knowledgeable  expert  in  the  product  would
have to be at hand as guarantor and place his name upon it if the name of
its originator was unavailable  or without significance.  The cheapness of a
product is  another  way  of deceiving  the  layman,  inasmuch  as it is  only
durability that can  determine  whether or not a thing is cheap; but that is
hard to assess, and for the layman impossible. - From all of which it fol-
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D OW
lows that what is attractive to the eye and costs little now commands the
market - and that can, of course, only be the product of the machine. For
its  part,  again,  the machine - that is  to say,  the means of great rapidity
and facility of production - also favours the most saleable type of product;
otherwise there is no great gain  to be made from it; it would be too little
used  and  too  often  silent.  But  what  is  most  saleable  is,  as  aforesaid,
decided by the public: it will be the most deceptive product, that is to say
that which appears to be of good quality and also appears to be cheap. Thus
in  this  domain  of work  too  our  watchword  must be:  'More  respect  for
those who know!'
The danger facing kings. - Democracy has the capacity, without employing
any  kind  of  violence  but  simply  by  applying  continual  constitutional
pressure,  to  render the offices of king and emperor hollow: until all  that
remains is a nought, though a nought perhaps,  if that is what one wants,
possessing  the  significance  of  every  nought  that,  in  itself  nothing,  if
placed in the right position  it multiplies the effect of a number by ten. The
office  of king  and  emperor  would  remain  a  splendid  ornament  on  the
simple and practical garment of democracy,  the fair superfluity it allows
itself, the remnant of all the historically venerable ornaments of its grandfathers,  indeed  the symbol  of history  itself - and in  this  unique quality something  of the  highest  effectiveness,  provided,  as  aforesaid,  it  does
not  stand  for  itself  alone  but  is  correctly  positioned.  - To  obviate  this
danger  of  being  hollowed  out,  kings  now  cling  with  their  teeth  to
their dignity as warlords: for this they require wars, that is to say states of
emergency  in  which  that slow constitutional  pressure  of the  forces  of
democracy lets up.
The teacher a necessary evil. - As few  people as possible between  the  productive  spirits  and  the  spirits  who  hunger  and  receive!  For  mediators almost  involuntarily  falsify  the  nourishment  they  mediate:  in  addition
they want too  much for themselves  as  payment  for  their mediation,  and
this  must be taken from  the  originating,  productive  spirits:  namely interest, admiration, time, money and other things. - Thus we must always regard the teacher as a necessary evil, just like the tradesman: as an evil we
must make as small as possible! - If the principal reason for the distressing
condition Germany is  now in  perhaps lies in  the fact  that far too many
want to live, and live well, by trade (that is to say, to try to buy as cheaply
as possible from the producers and to sell as dearly as possible to the consumers, and thus to profit at the greatest possible expense of both),  then a principal reason for its distressing spiritual condition is certainly to be
found  in  the  over-abundance  of teachers:  it  is  on  their account  that  so
little is learned and that little so badly.
28}
The respect-tax. - When someone we  know  and  honour, whether he be a
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
physician,  artist  or artisan,  does  or makes  something  for  us,  we  are
happy  to  pay  him  as  much  as  we  can,  often  indeed  beyond  our  real
capacities:  on  the  other hand,  we  will  pay  someone  unknown  to  us as
little as we can get away with; this is a struggle in which everyone fights
for every foot of land  and for which he makes everyone fight him. In the
case of work done for us by someone we know there is something beyond
price, the feeling and invention he has put into his work on our account: we
believe  we  can  express  our  sensibility  of  this  in  no  other  way  than
through a kind of sacrifice on our part. - The highest tax is the respect-tax.
The more the competitive  market dominates and we buy from strangers
and work for strangers,  the lower this tax will be: whereas it is in fact the
standard  of  measurement  of  the  degree  of  commerce  between  human
souls.
The means to real peace. - No  government  nowadays admits that it maintains an army so as to satisfy occasional thirsts for conquest; the army is supposed  to  be  for  defence.  That  morality  which  sanctions  selfprotection  is  called  upon  to  be  its  advocate.  But  that  means  to  reserve morality to oneself and to accuse one's neighbour of immorality, since he
has to be thought of as ready for aggression and conquest if our own state
is obliged to take thought of means of self-defence; moreover,  when our
neighbour denies any thirst for aggression  just as heatedly as our state
does,  and  protests  that  he  too  maintains  an  army  only  for  reasons  of
legitimate  self-defence,  our  declaration  of  why  we  require  an  army
declares our neighbour a hypocrite and cunning criminal who would be
only  too  happy  to  pounce  upon  a  harmless  and  unprepared  victim  and
subdue him without a struggle.  This is how all states now confront one
another:  they  presuppose  an  evil  disposition  in  their  neighbour  and  a
benevolent disposition in themselves. This presupposition, however, is a
piece of inhumanity as bad as,  if not worse than,  a war would be; indeed,
fundamentally it already constitutes  an invitation to and cause of wars,
because,  as  aforesaid,  it  imputes  immorality  to  one's  neighbour  and
thereby seems to provoke hostility and hostile acts on his part. The doctrine of the army as a  means of self-defence must be  renounced just as completely as the thirst for conquest. And perhaps there will come a great
day  on  which  a  nation distinguished for wars and  victories  and for  the
highest development of military discipline and thinking, and accustomed
to making  the heaviest sacrifices on behalf of these things, will cry of its
own free will:  'we shall shatter the sword' - and demolish its entire military
machine down to its last foundations. To disarm while being the best armed,
out  of an elevation of sensibility - that  is the  means  to real peace,  which
must always rest on a disposition for peace: whereas the so-called armed
peace such as now parades about in every country is a disposition to fractiousness  which  trusts  neither  itself  nor  its  neighbour  and  fails  to  lay down its arms  half out of hatred,  half out of fear. Better to perish than to
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
hate and fear, and twofold better to perish than to make oneself hated and feared this must one day become the supreme maxim of every individual state!
As is well  known,  our liberal representatives  of the people lack the time
to  reflect on  the  nature  of  man:  otherwise  they  would  know  that  they
labour  in  vain  when  they work  for  a  'gradual reduction  of the  military
burden'.  On  the  contrary,  it is  only  when  this  kind  of distress is at its
greatest  that  the  only  kind  of god  that  can  help  here  will be  closest  at
hand. The tree of the glory of war can be destroyed only at a single stroke,
by a lightning-bolt: lightning, however, as you well know, comes out of a
cloud and from on high.  -
Can property be reconciled with justice? - If there is a strong feeling that the
possession  of property  is  unjust - and  the  hand  of the  great  clock  has
again come round to this point - two ways of remedying the situation are
proposed: firstly an equal distribution, thE:n the abolition of property and
its reversion to the community. The latter remedy is especially beloved of
our socialists, who bear a grudge against that Jew of antiquity for saying:
thou shalt not steal. In their view the seventh commandment should read
rather:  thou shalt not possess. - Attempts to act in accordance with the
first recipe were often made in antiquity, always only on a small scale, to
be sure, yet with a lack of success from which we too can still gain instruction.  'Equal allotment of land'  is easily said,  yet how much acrimony is produced by the divisions and separations this necessitates, by the loss of
ancient valued property,  how much reverence is injured and sacrificed!
One  digs  up  morality  when  one  digs  up  boundary-stones.  And  how
much more acrimony among the new owners,  how much jealousy and
enviousness,  since two allotments of land have never been truly equal,
and even if such a  thing were  possible human envy of one's neighbour
would  still  not  believe  in  their  equality.  And  for how long would  this
equality,  unhealthy and poisoned at the roots as it is,  endure!  Within a
few  generations  inheritance  would  here  have  divided  one  allotment
among five people,  there given one person five allotments: and if stern
laws  of inheritance  obviated  such  improper arrangements there would
still be equal allotment of land,  to be sure, but at the same time an abundance  of  the  unprovided-for  and  discontested  who possessed  nothing except  feelings  of  envy  towards  their  neighbours  and  relations  and  a
desire that all things should be overturned. - If, however,  one wishes to
follow the second recipe and restore property to the community, with the
individual as no more than a temporary tenant, then one will destroy the
land. For upon that which he possesses only in passing man bestows no
care  or self-sacrifice,  he  merely  exploits  it  like  a  robber  or  a  dissolute
squanderer.  When  Plato  opines  that  with  the  abolition  of  property
egoism too will be abolished the reply to him is that,  in the case of man at
any rate,  the departure of egoism would also mean the departure of the
four cardinal virtues - for it has to be said that the foulest pestilence could
not do  so  much  harm  to  mankind  as  would  be  done  him if his  vanity
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
disappeared.  Without vanity and egoism - what are the human virtues?
Which is not intended remotely to imply that these are merely names and
masks  of such  virtues.  Plato's  utopian  basic  tune,  continued  on  in  our
own day by  the  socialists,  rests upon a defective knowledge of man: he
lacked a history of the moral sensations, an insight into the origin of the
good and useful qualities of the human soul.  Like the whole of antiquity
he believed in good and evil as in white and black:  thus in a radical difference between good and evil men,  good and bad qualities. - If property is  henceforth  to  inspire  more  confidence  and  become  more  moral,  we
must  keep  open  all  the  paths  to  the  accumulation  of  moderate  wealth
through work, but prevent the sudden or unearned acquisition of riches;
we must remove from the hands of private individuals and companies all
those  branches  of  trade  and  transportation  favourable  to  the  accumulation  of great  wealth,  thus  especially  the  trade  in  money - and  regard those who possess too much as being as great a danger to society as those
who possess  nothing.
The value of work. - If we wanted to determine the value of work by how
much time,  effort, good or ill will,  compulsion,  inventiveness or laziness,
honesty  or  deception  has  been  expended  on  it,  then  the  valuation can
never be just; for we would  have to be able to place the entire person on
the scales, and that is impossible.  Here the rule must be 'judge not!' But it
is precisely to justice that they appeal who nowadays are dissatisfied with
the evaluation of work.  If we reflect further we find  that no personality
can be held accountable  for what it produces,  that is to say its work:  so
that no merit can be derived from it; all work is as good or bad as it must be
given this or that constellation of strengths and  weaknesses, knowledge
and desires.  The worker is not free to choose whether he works,  nor how
he works.  It is only from  the standpoint of utility,  narrower and wider,
that work can be evaluated . That which we now call justice is in this field
very  much  in place as a  highly  refined  instrument of utility  which does
not pay regard only to the moment or exploit opportunities as they occur
but reflects  on the enduring advantage of all conditions and classes and
therefore  also  keeps  in  mind  the  wellbeing of the  worker,  his  contentment of body and soul - so that he and his posterity shall work well for our posterity  too  and  be  relied  on  for  a  longer  span  of  time  than  a  single
human life. The exploitation of the worker was, it has now been realized, a
piece of stupidity, an exhausting of the soil at the expense of the future,
an imperilling of society. Now we already have almost a state of war: and
the cost of keeping the peace, of concluding treaties and acquiring trust,
will henceforth in any event be very great, because the folly of the exploiters was very great and of long duration.
On  the study of the body politic. - The  worst ill-fortune for him who nowadays wants to study economics and politics in Europe, and especially in Germany, lies in the fact that, instead of exemplifying the rule, conditions
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
actually  obtaining  exemplify  the  exception  or  transitional  and  terminal
states. For this reason one has first to learn to see past the immediate factual data and to direct one's eyes, for example, to North America - where one  can  still see and  seek  out  the  inaugural and normal  motions of the
body politic, if only one wants to - whereas in Germany this can be done
only through arduous historical study or, as aforesaid, with a telescope.
To  what  extent  the  machine  abases  us.
The  machine  is  impersonal,  it
-
deprives the piece of work of its pride,  of the individual goodness and faultiness that adheres to all work not done by a machine - that is to say, of its little bit of humanity.  In earlier times all  purchasing  from  artisans  was a
bestowing of a distinction on individuals, and the things with which we surrounded ourselves were the insignia of these distinctions: household furniture and clothing  thus became symbols of mutual  esteem and personal solidarity,  whereas we now seem to  live in  the midst of nothing but an
anonymous and impersonal slavery. - We must not purchase the alleviation of work at too high a price.
Hundred-year  quarantine.
Democratic  institutions  are  quarantine
-
arrangements to combat that ancient pestilence, lust for tyranny: as such
they are very useful and very boring.
The  most dangerous follower.  - The  most  dangerous  follower is he  whose
defection would destroy the whole party: that is to say, the best follower.
Destiny and the stomach.  - One slice of bread and butter more or fewer in
the  stomach of a jockey can  occasionally  decide the outcome of the race
and  the  betting  and  thus  affect  the  fortunes  and  misfortunes  of  thousands.  - So  long as the  destiny  of nations  continues  to  depend  on the diplomats, the diplomats' stomachs will continue to be the object of patriotic anxiety.  Quousque tandem* -
Victory of democracy.  - All  political  powers  nowadays  try  to  exploit  the
fear of socialism in order to strengthen themselves.  But in the long run it
is  democracy alone  that  derives  the  advantage:  for all parties are  nowadays obliged to flatter the 'people' and to bestow on it alleviations and liberties of every kind  through which it will in the end become omnipotent.  As socialism is a doctrine that the acquisition of property ought to be abolished,  the  people  are as alienated  from it as they could be:  and
once they have got the power of taxation into their hands through their
great  parliamentary  majorities  they  will  assail  the  capitalists,  the  merchants and the princes of the stock exchange with a progressive tax and
•  Quousque  tandem:  How  much  longer . . .  ?  (the  beginning  of  Cicero's  outburst  in  the
Senate against the conspirator Catiline).
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O  H U M A N
slowly create in fact a  middle  class  which  will be in a  position  to forget
socialism like an illness it has  recovered  from. - The practical outcome of
this  spreading democratization  will  first of  all  be  a  European  league  of
nations within which each individual nation, delimited according to geographical  fitness,  will  possess  the  status  and  rights  of a  canton:  in  this process  the  historical recollections of the  former  nations  will be  of  little
account,  since  the  sense  of reverence  for  such  things  will  gradually  be
totally  uprooted  by  the  domination  of  the  democratic  principle,  which
thirsts for innovations and is greedy for experiments.  The corrections of
frontiers  which  prove  necessary  will  be  so  executed  as  to  serve  the
interests  of  the  large  cantons  and  at  the  same  time  those  of  the  whole
union, but not to  honour  the  memory of some grizzled  past.  The task of
discovering the principles  upon  which  these  frontier corrections  should
be made  will  devolve  upon  future  diplomats,  who will have to be at once
cultural scholars, agriculturalists and  communications experts,  and who
will  have behind them,  not armies,  but arguments and questions of utility.  Only  then  will foreign  policy  be  inseparably  tied  to  domestic policy: whereas  now the latter  still  has to run after its proud master and gather
up  in  a  pitiful  little  basket  the  stubble  left  behind  after  the  former  has
reaped its harvest.
End and means of democracy. - Democracy wants to create and guarantee as
much independence as possible: independence of opinion, of mode of life
and  of employment.  To that end it needs  to deprive of the right to vote
both those who possess no property and the genuinely rich: for these are
the  two  impermissible  classes  of  men  at whose  abolition  it  must  work
continually,  since  they continually call its  task into question. It must likewise prevent everything that  seems  to have for its objective the organization  of  parties.  For  the  three  great  enemies  of  independence  in  the above-named threefold  sense are the indigent, the rich and the parties.
I am speaking of democracy as of something yet to come. That which now
calls  itself  democracy  differs  from  older  forms  of government  solely  in
that it drives with new horses: the streets are still the same old streets, and
the wheels are likewise the same old wheels. - Have things really got less
perilous because the wellbeing of the nations now rides in this vehicle?
Circumspection and success. - That great quality of circumspection which is
at bottom the virtue of virtues, their great-grandmother and queen, is by
no means always crowned  with success in everyday life: and he who had
wooed  this  virtue  merely for the sake of achieving success would end up
disappointed. For practical people  hold it in suspicion and confuse it with
cunning  deceitfulness  and  hypocritical  slyness:  he,  on  the  other  hand,
who obviously lacks circumspection - the man who acts precipitately and
therefore sometimes acts wrongly - has in his favour the prejudice that he
is a  worthy,  reliable  fellow.  Practical  people  do not like  the circumspect
man  and  think he  is a  danger  to  them.  On the other hand,  the circum-
T H E   W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
spect  man  can  easily  be  taken  for  timid,  narrow-minded,  pedantic  -
impractical  and  easy-living  people  especially  find  him  uncomfortable
because  he  does  not  live  superficially  as  they  do,  heedless  of duty  and
practical affairs:  he  appears  among  them as  their embodied  conscience
and the sight of him makes the daylight grow pale.  If he thus lacks success  and  popularity,  however,  he  can  always console  himself with  the reflection: 'this is the high tax you have to pay for possessing something
of great value - it is worth it!'
Et in Arcadia ego.* - I looked  down,  over waves of hills,  through fir-trees
and spruce trees grave with age, towards a milky green lake: rocky crags
of every kind around me, the ground bright with flowers and grasses.  A
herd  of Cattle moved and spread itself OUt before me; solitary COWS  and
groups of cows farther off,  in vivid evening light close to the pinewood;
others nearer, darker; everything at peace in the contentment of evening.
The clock indicated nearly half-past five. The bull of the herd had waded
into  the  white,  foaming brook and  was  slowly  following its precipitate
course, now resisting it, now yielding: no doubt this was its kind of fierce
enjoyment.  The  herders  were  two  dark-brown  creatures  Bergamask  in
origin:  the  girl  clad  almost  as  a  boy.  To  the  left  mountain  slopes  and
snowfields beyond  broad  girdles of woodland,  to  the right,  high above
me,  two  gigantic  ice-covered  peaks  floating  in a  veil of sunlit  vapour -
everything big, still and bright.  The beauty of the whole scene induced in
me a sense of awe and of adoration of the moment of its revelation; ir,voluntarily, as if nothing were more  natural,  I inserted into this pure,  clear world  of light  (in  which  there  was  nothing  of desire or expectation,  no
looking before and behind) Hellenic heroes; my feeling must have been
like that of Poussin and his pupil:t at one and the same time heroic and
idyllic. - And that is how individual men have actually lived, that is how
they have enduringly felt they existed in the world and the world existed
in them; and among them was one of the greatest of men, the inventor of
an heroic-idyllic mode of philosophizing:  Epicurus.
Calculation  and  measuring.  - To  see  many  things,  to  weigh  them  one
against the other,  to add and subtract among them and to arrive rapidly
at a fairly accurate sum - that produces the great politician, general, merchant: it is speed in a kind of mental calculation. To see one thing, to find in it the sole motive for action and the judge over all other actions, produces the hero, also the fanatic - it is facility in measuring according to a standard.
Do  not  want  to  see  prematurely.
For  as  long  as  one  is  experiencing
--
•  Et in Arcadia ego: And  I,  too,  in Arcadia; employed  by  Goethe as  the  motto of his Italian
fourney.
t  Poussin and his pupil: probably Claude  Lorraine (16oo-82), who lived  in Rome after  1620
where he was a contemporary of Poussin's  (1593-1665). The poetic lighting of Claude's Mannerist landscapes forms an obvious contrast with the heroic drama of Poussin' s.
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
something one  must give  oneself up to  the  experience  and  close  one's
eyes: that is to say, not be an observer of it while still in the midst of it. For
that would disturb the absorption of the experience: instead of a piece of
wisdom one would aquire from it indigestion.
From the practice of the sage. - To become wise one must want to experience
certain  experiences,  that is to say run into their open  jaws.  This  is very
dangerous, to be sure;  many a 'sage'  has been gobbled up in the process.
Fatigue of spirit. - Our occasional indifference and coldness towards men,
which  is  interpreted  as  harshness  and  deficiency  of character in us,  is
often  only  a  weariness  of spirit:  when  we  are  afflicted with  this  other
people are burdensome or a matter of indifference to us, as we are to ourselves.
'One thing is needful'. - If we  are  sensible the  only thing that need concern
us is that we should have joy in our hearts. - Alas, someone added,  if we
are sensible the best  thing we can do is to be wise.
A testimony to love. - Someone said: 'There are two people upon whom I
have never thoroughly reflected: it is the testimony to my love for them.'
How we try to improve bad arguments. - Many people throw a piece of their
personality after  their bad arguments, as though this will make them run
a straighter course and transform them into good arguments; just as even
after he has thrown the ball the skittle-player continues to try to direct its
course with gestures and wavings of the hands.
Integrity. - It is still very little if one is an exemplary person with regard to
rights  and  property;  if,  for  example,  one  never  steals  fruit  from  other
people's gardens  as a boy, never walks across unmown fields as a man to cite small things which, as is well known, offer a better demonstration of this kind of exemplariness than do big ones.  It is still very little: one is
still only a 'juridical person' with that degree of morality of which even a
'society', a cluster of men,  is capable.
Man! - What is the  vanity  of the vainest  man compared with the vanity
which the most modest  possesses when,  in the  midst of nature and the
world, he feels himself to be 'man'!
The most needful gymnastic. - A lack of self-mastery in small things brings
about  a  crumbling  of the  capacity  for  it  in  great  ones.  Every  day  is  ill
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
employed,  and a danger for the next day,  in which one has not denied
oneself some small thing at least once: this gymnastic is indispensable if
one wants to preserve in oneself the joy of being one's own master.
Losing oneself.  - Once  one has found  oneself one must understand  how
from time to time to lose oneself - and then how to find oneself again: supposing,  that  is,  that  one  is  a  thinker.  For  to  the  thinker it is  disadvantageous to be tied to one person all the time.
When  it  is  necessary  to depart. - From  that  which  you  want  to  know  and
assess you must depart,  at least for a time.  Only when you have left the
town can you see how high its towers rise above the houses.
3o8
At noon. - He who has been granted an active and storm-filled morning of
life is overcome at the noontide of life by a strange longing for repose that
can last for months or years. It grows still around him, voices recede into
the distance; the  sun shines down on him from high overhead.  Upon a
concealed  woodland  meadow  he  sees  great  Pan  sleeping;  all  things  of
nature have fallen asleep with him,  an expression of eternity on their face
- that is how it seems  to him. He wants  nothing,  he is troubled by nothing, his heart stands still, only his eyes are alive - it is a death with open eyes. Then the man sees many things he never saw before, and for as far
as  he  can see  everything  is  enmeshed  in  a  net  of  light  and  as  it  were
buried  in  it.  He feels happy as he gazes,  but it is a heavy,  heavy happiness. - Then at length the wind rises in the trees, noon has gone by,  life again  draws  him  to  it,  life  with  unseeing  eyes,  its  train  of  followers
sweeping along behind it:  desire,  deception,  forgetfulness,  destruction,
transience. And thus evening rises up, more active and more storm-filled
even  than  the  morning.  - To  truly active  men  the  more  long enduring
states of knowledge seem almost uncanny and morbid, but not unpleasant.
Beware of your portraitist. - A  great painter who has unveiled and set down
in a portrait the completest expression of the moment of which a man is
capable will,  if he afterwards meets him again in real life,  almost always
believe he is seeing only a caricature of him.
The two principles of the new life. - First principle: life should be ordered on
the basis of what is most certain and most demonstrable, not as hitherto
on that of what is most remote, indefinite and no more than a cloud on
the horizon. Second principle: the order of succession of what is closest and
most immediate, less close and less immediate,  certain and less certain,
should  be  firmly established before one  orders  one's  life  and  gives it a
definitive direction.
Dangerous susceptibility.  - Talented  people who are  indolent will always
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
appear somewhat irritated when one of their friends completes a sound
piece of work. Their jealousy is aroused,  they are ashamed of their laziness - or rather, they fear that the active man will now despise them even more than before. It is in this mood that they criticize the new work - and
their criticism becomes an act of revenge through which they completely
alienate its author.
Destruction  of  illusions.  - Illusions  are  certainly  expensive  amusements:
but the  destruction of illusions  is even more expensive - regarded as a
source of amusement, which is what it undeniably is for many people.
The monotony of the sage. - Cows sometimes wear an expression of wonderment halted  on the way to a question. In the eye of the  higher intelligence,  on  the  other  hand,  the  nil  admirari*  lies  extended  like  the monotony of a cloudless sky.
Do not be ill too long. - One should take care not to be ill too long: for the
conventional obligation to manifest signs of sympathy will soon make the
witnesses of one's illness impatient, since it costs them too much effort to
maintain  this condition in themselves for long - and then they will pass
directly over to doubting your character and will arrive at the conclusion
'he deserves to be ill, and we no longer need to exert ourselves to feel sympathetic'.
Hint for enthusiasts.  - He who  likes  to  be  carried  away  and  wants  to  be
borne  along easily on top  should  see  to  it that he  does  not become  too
heavy:  which means,  for example, that he does  not learn a great  deal  and
in particular does not let himself be filled with science. For this makes one
ponderous! - take  care,  enthusiasts!
Knowing how to surprise oneself.  He  who wants to see  himself as he is
-
must understand how to surprise himself, torch in hand. For it is with the
spiritual as it is with the bodily: he who is accustomed to looking at himself in a mirror always forgets how ugly he is: it is only through the painter that he recovers an impression of it.  But he then grows accustomed to the painting and forgets how  ugly he is a second time. - This happens in
accordance with the universal law that man cannot endure the unchangeingly ugly; or if he can, it is only for a moment: in every case he forgets it or denies that it is ugly. - It is upon this moment that moralists have to
count if they are to display their truths.
Opinions  and fish.  One  possesses  one's  opinions  in  the  way  one  pos-
-
•  nil admirari:  admire nothing
T H E   W A N D E R E R  A N D   H I S   SHADOW
sesses fish - insofar, that is, that one posseses a fishpond. One has to go
fishing and be lucky - then one has one's own fish, one's own opinions. I am
speaking here of living opinions, of living fish. Others are content to possess a cabinet of fossils - and, in their heads, 'convictions'. -
)18
Tokens of freedom and unfreedom . - To satisfy one's necessary requirements
as completely as possible oneself, even if imperfectly, is the road to freedom of spirit and person. To  let  others satisfy many of one's requirements, even  superfluous  ones,  and  as  perfectly  as  possible  - is  a  training  in
unfreedom. The sophist Hippias, who had himself acquired, himself produced,  everything he wore,  within and without,  represents in precisely this  the  road  to  the  highest  freedom  of  spirit  and  person.  It  does  not
matter if everything is not equally well made, pride will patch up the tattered spots.
Belief in oneself. - In our age we distrust everyone who believes in himself;
in  former  ages  it  sufficed  to  make  others  believe  in  us.  The  recipe  for
obtaining belief now is:  'Do not spare yourself ! If you want to place your
opinions in a believable light first set fire to your own house!'
)20
At once richer and poorer. - I know a man who had already as a child accustomed himself to think well of the intellectuality of men - that is to say, of their genuine devotion to things of the spirit,  their unselfish preference
for what is known to be true, and the like - but on the other hand to have
a modest,  indeed a poor idea of his own brain (his judgement, memory,
presence of mind, imagination). When he compared himself with others
he always came out badly. In the course of years, however, he was compelled, at first once then a hundred times, to learn otherwise on this point
- a  fact which would, one might think, have given him great joy and satisfaction.  And he did indeed experience something of this; but 'nonetheless', as he once said,  'there is in it also a bitterness of the bitterest kind which I did not know in earlier life: for since I have come to assess men
and myself more justly my mind seems to me to be of less use; I seem to
be  unable  to  do  any  good  with  it,  because  the  minds  of  others  do  not
know  how  to accept  it:  I now see always before  me the terrible gulf between those who can offer help and those who need it. And thus I am tormented by having to enjoy the fruits of my mind all by myself, so far as they are enjoyable at all. But to give is more blessed than to have: and what
is the richest of men in the solitude of a desert!'
)21
Modes of attack. - The grounds upon which we believe or do not believe in
something are with very few people indeed nearly as strong as they could
be. To shatter belief in something it is as a rule in no way necessary at once
to bring out one's heaviest cannon; with many people it is enough simply
to launch an attack with a certain amount of noise: so that often a popgun
H U M A N ,   A L L  TOO  H U M A N
will do. Against very vain people all that is required is the appearance of a
heavy attack:  they see  themselves  being taken very  seriously - and are
glad to give in.
Death.  - The certain prospect of death could introduce into every  life  a
precious,  sweet-smelling drop of levity - and yet you marvellous apothecary souls have made of it an ill-tasting drop of poison through which all life is made  repulsive!
Remorse.  - Never  yield  to  remorse,  but  at  once  tell  yourself:  remorse
would  simply  mean adding to the first act of stupidity a second. - If we
have done harm we should give thought to how we can do good. - If we
are punished for our actions, let us endure our punishment with the feeling that we are thereby already doing good:  we are deterring others from falling victim  to the  same  folly.  Every  ill-doer  who has been punished  is
entitled  to feel he is a benefactor of mankind.
To become a  thinker.  - How  can  anyone become  a  thinker if he  does  not
spend  at least a  third  of the day without passions,  people and books?
The  best  remedy.  - A  little  health  now  and  again  is  the  invalid's  best
remedy.
Don't touch! - There are dreadful people who,  instead of solving a problem,  tie it in knots  and  make  it harder for  others  to solve.  He who does not know how to hit the nail on the head ought to be asked not to hit it at
all.
Forgotten nature. - We speak of nature and forget to include ourselves: we
ourselves are  nature, quand meme* - .  It  follows that nature is something
quite different from what we think of when we speak its name.
Profundity and tedium. - With profound men, as with deep wells, it takes a
long time for anything  that has fallen into them to reach the bottom. The
spectators,  who  usually  fail  to  wait  long  enough,  can  easily  come  to
regard such men as  harsh and immovable - or as  tedious.
When it is time to vow loyalty to oneself. - Sometimes we stray on  to a spiritual course that contradicts our talents;  for a time we struggle heroically against wind  and  tide,  at bottom' against ourself: we grow weary,  gasping;  what  we  achieve  brings  us  no  real  joy,  we feel we  have  paid  too highly for it. Indeed, we despair of our fruitfulness and of our future, per-
•  quand meme: nonetheless
THE  W A N D E R E R   A N D   H I S   S H A D O W
haps in the  midst of victory.  At long last we turn round - and  now  the
wind is blowing into our sails and driving us into our own channel.  What
happiness! How sure of victory we feel! Only now do we know what we
are and  what we  want,  now we vow  to be  loyal to  ourselves  and have a
right to do so - because we  know what it means.
Weather prophets. - Just as the clouds tell us the direction of the wind high
above our  heads,  so the lightest and freest spirits are in  their tendencies
foretellers of the weather that is coming.  The wind in the valley and the
opinions of the  market-place  of today  indicate  nothing  of that which  is
coming but only of that which has been.
Steady acceleration.  - People  who  start  slowly  and  find  it  hard  to  feel  at
home in a thing sometimes possess afterwards the quality of steady acceleration - so  that  in  the  end  no  one  knows  whither  the  current will yet carry them.
The three good things.  - Greatness,  repose,  sunlight  - these  three  things
embrace everything a thinker desires and demands of himself:  his hopes
and duties,  his claims in  the intellectual and moral  spheres,  even in the
way he lives day by day and the quality of the landscape where he dwells.
They answer  firstly  to  elevating  thoughts,  then  to  quietening,  thirdly to
enlightening  fourthly,  however,  to  thoughts  which  participate  in  all
-
three qualities, in which everything earthly comes to transfiguration: it is
the kingdom where there reigns the great trinity of joy.
Dying for 'truth'. - We would not let ourselves be burned to death for our
opinions: we are  not  sure  enough  of them  for  that.  But perhaps for the
right to possess our opinions and to change them.
Having one's fixed price.  - If one wants  to count for precisely what one  is,
one has to be something that has its fixed price. But only the commonplace
has  its  fixed price.  Thus  this  desire  is either the  result  of an  intelligent
modesty - or an  unintelligent immodesty.
Moral  for  house-builders.  - One  must  remove  the  scaffolding  once  the
house has been built.
Sophoclism.  - Who  has  ever  put  more  water  into  their  wine  than  the
Greeks! Sobriety and gracefulness  combined - that was  the privilege of
the  nobility  of  Athens  at  the  time  of  Sophocles  and  after  him.  Imitate
them who can! In life and in works!
The heroic. - The heroic consists in doing a great thing (or in not doing a
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
thing in a great fashion) without feeling oneself to be in competition with
others before others. The hero always bears the wilderness and the sacred,
inviolable borderline  within  him wherever he may go.
Nature as  Doppelganger.  - There  is  many a  spot in  nature  where,  with  a
pleasurable  shudder,  we rediscover ourself; it is nature as the fairest kind
of Doppelganger.  - What happiness awaits  him  who  experiences  such a
sensation  in  just  this  spot,  in  this  continual  sunny  October  air,  in  this
roguish play of the breeze from morn till night, in this purest brightness
and temperate coolness, in the whole charm and gravity of the hills, lakes
and  forests  of  this  high  plateau  that  has  fearlessly  stretched  itself  out
beside the terrors of the eternal snow,  here where Italy and Finland have
entered into a union and all the silvery tones of nature seem to have made
their home: - how happy he who can say:  'there are certainly greater and
fairer things in nature, but this is mine and known to me, a blood relation,
and more indeed  than  that'.
Geniality of the sage. - The sage will involuntarily mingle with other people
as genially as a prince and, all differences of talent, rank and morality notwithstanding, easily be inclined to treat them as equals: which, as soon as it is noticed, causes great offence.
Gold. - All that is gold does not glisten.  A gentle radiance pertains to the
noblest metal.
Wheel and brake. - The wheel and the brake have differing duties,  but also
one in common: to hurt one another.
Disturbances  while  thinking.  - The  thinker  must  regard  everything  that
interrupts  his  thoughts  (disturbs  them,  as we  say)  with equanimity,  as
though it were a new model coming in to offer herself to the artist. Interruptions are the ravens which bring food to the solitary.
Possessing much spirit.  - To  possess much spirit keeps one young: but in
exchange one must endure being thought older than one is. For men read
the characters inscribed by the spirit as signs of experience of life, that is to
say  of  having  experienced  many,  and  many  bad  things,  of  suffering,
error and remorse. Thus, one is thought not only older but worse than one
is when one possesses much  spirit  and  shows it.
The proper way to win. - One ought not to want to win if one has the pros-
pect  of  overtaking  one's  opponent  by  only  a  hair's  breadth.  The  good
THE  W A N D E R E R   A N D   HIS  S H A DOW
victory must put the conquered into a joyful mood, it must possess something divine that does not put to shame.
Illusion of superior spirits. - Superior spirits have difficulty in freeing themselves  from  an  illusion:  they  imagine  they  excite  envy  among  the mediocre and are  felt  to be  exceptions.  In fact they  are  felt  to be something quite superfluous which if it did not exist no one would miss.
Demand of cleanliness. - Changing one's  opinions  is  to one nature just  as
much  a  demand  of cleanliness  as  changing  one's  clothes:  for  another,
however, it is only a demand of vanity.
This,  too,  is worthy of a hero.  - Here is  a hero  who has done nothing but
shake  the tree as soon as the fruit was ripe.  Do you  think this too little?
Then take a look at the tree he shook.
Measure of wisdom.  - Growth  in  wisdom  can  be  measured  precisely  by
decline in bile.
Calling error unpleasant. - It is not to everyone's taste that truth should be
called  pleasant.  But at least let no  one  believe that error becomes  truth
when it is called unpleasant.
The golden watchword. - Many chains have been laid upon man so that he
should no longer behave like an animal: and he has in truth become gentler, .more spiritual, more joyful, more reflective than any animal is.  Now, however, he suffers from having worn his chains for so long, from being
deprived for so long of clear air and free movement: - these chains, however,  I shall never cease from repeating,  are  those heavy and pregnant errors contained in  the conceptions of morality, religion and metaphysics.  Only when this sickness from one's chains has also been overcome will the first great goal have truly been attained: the separation of man from
the animals. - We stand now in the midst of our work of removing these
chains,  and we need to proceed with the greatest caution.  Only the ennobled man may be given freedom of spirit; to him alone does alleviation of life draw  near and  salve his wounds;  only he may say  that he lives  for  the
sake of joy and for the sake of no further goal; and in any other mouth his
motto would be perilous: Peace all around me and goodwill to all things closest
to  me.  - With  this  motto  for  individuals he  recalls  an  ancient  great  and
moving saying intended for all which has remained hanging over all mankind as a sign and motto by which anyone shall perish who inscribes it on his banner  too  soon - by  which  Christianity perished.  The  time has,  it
seems, still not yet come when all men are to share the experience of those
shepherds  who  saw  the  heavens brighten  above  them  and  heard  the
H U M A N ,   A L L  T O O   H U M A N
words:  'On earth peace,  good will toward men'.  - It is still the age of the
individual.
The Shadow: Of all you  have  said nothing has pleased me more than a
promise you have made:  you want again to become a good neighbour to
the  things closest to  you.  This  will  benefit  us poor shadows,  too.  For -
admit it - you have hitherto been only too happy to slander us.
The Wanderer: Slander? But why have you never defended yourselves?
You were close enough to our ear, after all.
The Shadow: It seemed to us we were much too close to venture to speak
of ourselves.
The Wanderer: How very tactful! You shadows are 'better men' than we
are,  that I can see.
The Shadow: And yet you called us 'importunate' - us, who understand
at any rate one thing well: to stay silent and wait - no Englishman understands  it  better.  It is true we are to be  found very,  very often  following behind  man,  yet we  are not  his  slaves.  When  man  shuns  the  light,  we
shun  man:  our freedom extends that far.
The Wanderer:  Alas,  the  light  shuns  man  much  more often,  and  then
you too desert him.
The Shadow: It is often with sorrow that I have deserted you: it seems to
me,  who am greedy for knowledge, that much that is dark still adheres to
man  because I cannot always be with  him.  If the reward  were a perfect
knowledge of man  I might even agree to be  your slave.
The Wanderer:  But  do  you  know,  do  I  know,  whether you would  not
then  change  unawares  from  slave  to  master?  Or,  though  still  a  slave,
come to despise your master and live a life of abasement and disgust? Let
us both be content with such freedom as you have - you and me! For the
sight  of one  unfree  would  embitter for me all my joy;  I would find even
the best  things  repulsive if someone  had to share them with me - I want
no slaves  around me.  That is why I will not have even a dog,  that lazy,
tail-wagging  parasite  who  has become  'doglike'  only  through being the
slave  of man and who  is  even  commended for loyalty to his  master and
willingness to follow him like his -
The Shadow: Like his shadow,  that is how they put it.  Perhaps today too
I have already been following you too long? It has been the longest day,
but we have reached its end,  be patient a little while longer! The grass is
damp, I am getting cold.
The Wanderer: Oh, is it already time for us to part? And I had to end by
hurting you; I  saw  it,  you  grew darker as I  did  it.
The  Shadow:  I  blushed,  in  the colour  in  which  I  am  able  to blush.  It
occurred to me that I have often lain at your feet like a dog, and that you
then -
The Wanderer: And could I not, in all haste, do something to please you?
Is there nothing you want?
The  Shadow:  Nothing,  except  perhaps  that  which  the  philosophical
'dog'  desired of the great Alexander: that you should move a little out of
THE  W A N D E R E R  A N D  H I S   S H A D O W
the sunlight,  I am feeling too cold.
The Wanderer: What shall I do?
The Shadow: Step under these trees and look out at the mountains; the
sun is sinking.
The Wanderer: - Where are you? Where are you?
INDEX
In  this  index  Nietzsche's  section/ aphorism  numbers  are  used,  rather  than  page
numbers.  Because he  published  the  various  parts of Human, All Too Human  on three
different occasions, restarting his  numbering each  time,  it is necessary to  indicate  in
the parts: '1' indicates what is now the first volume, '11' indicates what is now the first
part  of the  second  volume  (published  separately  but as  a continuation  of the  work
under  the  title  Assorted  Opinions  and  Maxims)  and  'WS'  indicates  what  is  now  the
second part of the second volume (published separately under the title The Wanderer
and His Shadow). 'P'  indicates Nietzsche's  1886 preface to the  specified  volume of the
two-volume edition.
R.S.
action 1:1o6,  107, 293, 596; 11:34, 51, 394;
38, 52; aesthetic 11:133; intellectual
WS:236
11:P:6; 11:26, 98, 215; WS:43
Aeschylus (525-456 Be) 1:125, 170
culture 1:3, 25, 42, 43, 224-92, 439, 444,
aesthetic sensibility 1:2 3
465, 474, 477, 480, 481, 520, 614, 632;
appearance 1:10,  16, 51
11:13, 179,  183,  186, 323; WS:188, 220,
Aristotle (384-322 BC) 1:212, 261, 264
226, 279
art (and artists) 1:3, 4, 6,  10, 13, 29,  108,
custom  1:20,  24, 25, 96,  97,  224; 11:89;
126, 145-223, 236, 239, 272, 276, 486;
WS77
11:28,  100,  102,  103,  109,  115-26,
131-3,  136,  146,  148,  150,  151, 154,
death 1:8o;  11:88; WS:58,  185,  322
169, 173-8, 182, 284, 371, 4o6;
Democritus (46o?-362? BC) 1:15
WS:136,  170
democracy WS:275, 281, 289, 292, 293
asceticism 1:76,  136-44
dreams  1:5,  12,  13;  WS:194
Bach, Johann Sebastian (1685-1750)
education 1:224, 242, 254, 265-7, 272,
1:219; 11:298; WS:149
274, 409,  467;  11:180,  181,  184, 213,
beauty 1:3,  145,  149, 218; 11:101, 118, 336
268; WS:18o, 213, 267, 282
Beethoven, Ludwig van (177o-1827)
egoism 1:101; 11:91
1:153,  155,  173; 11:298; WS:152,  155
enlightenment 1:26,  55, 110,  150, 463;
Byron, George Noel Gordon, Lord
WS:221
(1788-1824) 1:109, 221, 422
Epictetus (6o?-12o?) 11:224, 386
Epicurus (342?-270 Be) 1:68; 11:224, 4o8;
causality 1:18
WS7,  192,  227
character 1:228
Erasmus, Desiderius (1466?-1536)  1:26
Chopin, Frederic Fram;ois (181o-49)
error 1:9,  11, 3 3, 34, 187
WS:159,  16o
ethics, see morality
Christ, Jesus (4? BC-29 AD) 1:235, 475;
Euripides (48o-4o6 BC) 1:170
11:94, 98;  WS:81,  83, 84, 86
Europe 1:P:2; 1:265; 11:P:6; WS:215
Christianity 1:26,  27, 47, 55, 68,  101,  110,
evi1 1:45
113-19,  130, 132, 134-6,  141,  144, 226,
227, 237, 244, 247, 396,  555;  11:8, 33,
faith, 1:225-7
92-8, 224-6; WS:57,  69, 74, 78,  81,  84,
fathers, see mothers and fathers
85,  156,  182
Frederick the Great (1712-86) 1:248
comedy 1:169
free spirit(s) 1:P:2-7; 1:30, 34,  131, 225,
conscience  1:597; 11:42, 43, 87, 90; WS7,
229-32, 282, 291, 432, 464, 595, 637,
I N DE X
638; n:P:t; n:4,  11, 21, 113, 211, 223,
idealism, idealists, idealizing 1:279;
237; WS:87
n:86, 1.57, 34.5,  3.50
freedom 1:P:3-.5; 1:18, 34, 39, 106,  107,
irony 1:372
288;  WS:t,  9-12,  23, 28,  61,  69,  81,  318
friendship 1:3.54, 368, 376,  378, 390, 400,
Jean Paul (Johann Paul Friedrich
499; Il:241, 242, 2_51, 2_52, 2_59, 200
Richter,  1763-182.5) WS:gg
Jesus, see Christ
genius, 1:126,  1.57, 162-.5, 168, 231, 233-
Jews 1:47.5
.5, 241, 461; II:1_5_5,  18_5,  186,  192, 378,
justice 1:6g, 92, 446, 4.51, 4.52, 629;
WS:28, 32, 64, 28.5
Germans 1:P:1, 8;  1:203; n:P:t; n:170,
298,  299, 302, 319,  323, 324; WS:87,
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804) 1:1g, 21,
9Q, 91, 94, 9.5,  107,  109,  124, 12_5,  146,
2_5; II:27; WS:216
214, 216,  224, 228
Kepler, Johann (1.571-t63o) 1:1.57
God(s)  1:.5,  2.5, 28,  to8-to,  133, 134,  143,
knowledge 1:6, 7, g,  11,  1.5, 16, 18, 29,
238, 24.5; n:22, 22.5; WS:7, 46, So
}1-4,  107,  1_57, 19_5, 2_52,  271, 2?8,  291,
Goethe, von, Johann Wolfgang (1749-
292, 486, _500, .51}, .5.54' .578, 618, 621,
1832) 1:110,  111, 12_5,  162, 221, 26_5,
630, 631, 63.5-8; n:P:6; n:2-4, 7,  8,  13,
272, 279, 626, 631; u:gg,  170,  173, 227,
26, 27, }D-2, 49,  86, g8,  18_5, 22}, }18,
298,  302, 4o8; WS:Sg, go, 99,  107,  109,
399; WS:t, 6, 16,  17; see also
118, 124, 12_5, 149, 214
philosophy; science; and truth
good (and evil) 1:4.5
government 1:4.50, 472; n:}t8, 320;
language 1:11, 216, 267; n:1o.5; WS:.5,  1 1,
WS:284
.5.5
grand style WS:g6
La Rochefoucauld, Franc;ois de (1613-
gratitude 1:44
So) 1:3_5, 36, .50, 133; WS:214
greatness 1:1_58,  163, 400, 488, 496,  .521,
law 1:4.59
588; n:tgt, 207,  398, 407; WS:332
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (1729-81)
Greeks  1:P:1;  1:111, 114, 1.54, 170, 19.5,
1:221; WS:103
214, 221, 22}, 2_59, 261, 262, 264, 3.54'
logic 1:6,  11,  13, 18,  31,  32
474, 47.5; n:112, 169,  170,  172,  177,
love q8,  _58, 6g, 77, 389, 392, 396, 397,
187,  189, 218-24; WS:114,  122,  140,
401, 410, 41}, 41_5, 418, .52},  _566,  001,
167, 184, 190, 22_5, 226, 2}0-2
00}; II:7.5, 9.5, 273, 28o, 287, 341
Luther, Martin (1483-1.546) 1:26, 237;
Handel,  George Frederick (168.5-1759)
Il:226
II:2g8; WS:1_50
happiness 1:49,  .591,  611; WS:26.5, 271
Macchiavelli, Niccolo (1469-1.527) 1:224
Haydn, (Franz) Joseph (1732-1809)
man, 1:P7; 1:2, 2.5, 29, 31, 36, 37, 40-3,
WS:1.51
_56,  107,  100,  169, 224, 2}4, 2}9, 247,
health 1:P:4, .5; n:P:2, 4-6; n:3.56
2_51, 2_58, 292, .58_5, 6o8, 624; II:17, }},
Helvetius, Claude Adrien (171.5-71)
36, 49,  342, 38.5; WS:12,  14, 21,  183,
WS:216
189, 269,  27.5, 304, 327,  33.5; see also
Heraclitus (.53.5?-47.5? BC) n:223
humanity,  higher and women (and
herd (humanity) n:223
men)
Herder, von, Johann Gottfried (1744-
marriage 1:378, 389, 393, 394, 399, 402,
1803) WS:118,  12.5
400, 421, 424, 426, 427, 436, _596
Hesiod (fl. 8th c. BC) WS:2.56
mathematics 1:11, 19
higher humanity, see humanity, higher
men, see women (and men)
history 1:2, 37;  n:to,  17, 223
Mendelssohn, Felix (1809-47) WS:1.57
Holderlin, Friedrich (1770-1843) 1:2.59
Merimee, Prosper (t8o3-7o) 1:.50
Homer (fl. gth c. BC) 1:4.5, 12.5, 211, 262;
metaphysics 1:1, _5, 8-10, 1.5-17, 20, 21,
n:t8g,  212,  219,  220; WS:113, 122,  140
30,  to8; n:12, 14,  17
humanity, higher 1:3, 20,  94,  9.5, 107,
Montaigne, de, Michel Eyquem (1.533-
224, 2}4, 2}9, 240, 245, 246, 248, 2_58,
92) 1:176; n:4o8; WS:86, 214
263, 272, 274, 28.5, 292, .509; n:62,  99,
moralists n:_5, 33, 72; WS:tg, 20
t8o,  183-7, 223; WS:197,  33.5, 34.5, 3.50;
morality, 1:P:1; 1:4,  14, 23, 2.5, 28, 37,  39,
see also greatness and nobility
40,  42, 4.5' 48, 49, .52-7, .59, 00, 68, 78,
I N D E X
91, 94-6, 99·  102-.5, 10'J, 1)8, 228, 4.5.5·
Ree, Paul (1849-1901) 1:36, 37,  133
47.5, .509, .512, .524; II:J.5, 40, .51, .5.5, .56,
Reformation 1:26, 237, 633
71, 7J, 89-91, 197, 220, 2)6, JOO;
religion 1:4, 10,  14, 27, 29, 1o8-44, 226,
WS:21, 22, 26,  31, 3.5, 4o-.5, 48, .57, 62-
28o, 472; I1:222
4, 70, 77·  114,  1)6,  148,  18),  18.5,  190,
Renaissance 1:26,  12.5, 237
212, 216,  2.56, )0.5,  )10,  3.50
responsibility 1:70, 103, 1o6, 107; II:JJ,
mothers and fathers 1:379-82, 38.5-7,
.51, 78; WS:69, 81
392, 42), 434
revenge 1:44, 6o, 62; WS:JJ, 237, 2.59
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (17.56-91)
revolution 1:4.54, 463
II:171, 298; WS:1.52, 16.5
rights 1:93; WS:39,  2.51
music 1:177,  198, 21.5-17, 219, 222; n:P:3;
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-78) 1:463,
II:1J4, 144, 1.59· 171, 21); WS:149-69
617; n:4o8; WS:221,  216
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769-1821) 1:164,
scepticism 1:21; n:71
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich
nature 1:8,  19; n:9
(17.59-18o.5) 1:176,  221;  n:126, 227;
nobility 1:366, 440, 4.51, 479, 493, 497,
WS:99,  123,  12.5,  216
.504; II:7J, 2o6, )8),  397
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst Daniel
Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg,
(1768-18)4) 1:1)2
1722-18o1) 1:142
Schopenhauer, Arthur (1788-186o)
1:P:1;  1:21, 26, 39, .57, 10), 110, 2)6,
paganism n:220, 222
238, 271; n:P:1; n:.5, JJ,  18.5, 271, 4o8;
Palestrina,  Giovanni Pierluigi  da
WS:17, 214
(1.526?-94) 1:219
Schubert,  Franz (1797-1828) WS:1.5.5
Pascal, Blaise (1623-62) n:4o8
Schumann, Robert (181o-18.56) WS:161
passion(s) 1:61, 72, .584, 629; WS:37, .53,
science (Wissenschajt) 1:3, 6, 7, 16, 18, 19,
22, 27, 29, )7, )8, 128, 182, 222, 2)7,
patriotism 1:442
2.51, 2.56, 2.57, 264, 272, 276, 63.5; II:J1,
perspective 1:P:6; n:86
90, 203-6, 21.5, 221, 318; WS:171, 179,
pessimism 1:28; n:P:J, .5, 7
19.5
Petrarch, Francesco (1304-74) 1:26
selfhood n:366; higher, 1:624, 629
philosophy 1:1, 2, 6, 7, '2.7, 188, 638; n:1,
Shakespeare,  William (1.564-1616) 1:61,
.5· 10, )1, 142, 14), 18o, 182, 194· 201,
12.5, 162, 176; n:162
271, 38o; WS:16; see also knowledge;
socialism 1:446, 4.51, 4.52, 473, 48o;
science;  and truth
n:J04, 316; WS:292
pity  1:.50,  103, 212;  n:68; WS:.5o, 62
Socrates (469-399 BC) 1:102, 126, 261,
Plato  (427?-347 BC) 1:.50, 102,  164, 212,
361, 433; II:94; WS:6, 72, 86
261, 473· 474· 628; II:271, 4o8; WS:28.5
Sophocles  (496?-4o6 Be) n:61, 162, 173
pleasure 1:98, 99, 103, 104, 213, 2.52, .501,
soul 1:.5,  100; n:17, 26
6o6
Spinoza,  Baruch (1632-77) 1:1.57, 47.5;
Plutarch (46?-12o?) 1:36
IJ:4o8
poetry (and poets) 1:13, 33, 148, 207,
spirit 1:3; n:11
221; II:99,  10.5,  111, 114,  13.5, 162,  172,
state (the) 1:23.5, 472-474; WS:232, 284
176; WS:10.5
Sterne,  Laurence (1713-68) n:113
politics 1:438, 44.5, 449, 4.5P, 4.53, 4.58,
suffering q6, 81, 1.57, 462, .591
46o, 472,  481;  I1:)0.5-18, )20
suicide 1:8o, 88
power 1:44, 446, 46.5, .59.5; WS:181
Swift, Jonathan (1667-174.5) 1:44, .54
progress 1:24
sympathy 1:46, 47
promising 1:.58
psychology, 1:3.5-8, 293-376
talent 1:263, 264
punishment 1:66, 103
theology 1:28
thing-in-itself 1:10,  16
Raphael (1483-1.520) 1:162; WS:73
Thucydides (471?-400? BC) 1:92
reality 1:9-11, 1.5, 16, 19, 28, 214; n:J,  19,
tradition 1:23, ¢, 111, 22.5, .5.52; WS:39
27, 32,  33, 49, 114,  13.5, 220; WS:2, .5,
tragedy 1:166, 169,  170, 212; n:23;
11, 17, 67
WS:124
reason 1:11, 13; WS:2
truth I:J,  11, 1.5, 22, 34, 1)1, 146, 161,
I N D E X
187, 220, 225, 227,  251, 257, 270,  271,
(1694-1778) 1:26, 204, 438, 463; 11:4;
5o6, 517, 519, 60<), 63o-6; 11:7, 13,  19,
WS:237
20, 26, 32, 79, 190, 2o8, 286, 345, 358;
WS:1, 4,  13, 66, 316; see also
Wagner, Richard (1813-83) 1:P:1; 11:P:1,
knowledge;  philosophy;  and
3; 11:134,  171
science
war 1:444, 477, 481; WS:187, 281, 284
Wieland, Christoph Martin (1733-1813)
value 1:P:6, 7; 1:17, 42, 77, 92,  585,  586,
WS:107
628, 629;  11:1,  16, 98, 190; WS:3, 4, 33,
will 11:5, 50; see also freedom
204,  2o6; of life, 1:32, 33, 287, 586
women (and men) 1:64, 259, 377, 38o,
vanity 1:79, 82, 89,  162,  313,  338, 545,
383, 385, 3�2, 398, 400, 401, 405,
574, 583, 593; 11:38, 46, 240, 263, 289,
410-20, 424, 425, 431-5, 492; 11:265,
379; WS:31, 6o,  181, 285
272-4, 276, 282, 284, 286, 287, 2�2;
virtue(s) 1:P:6;  1:75, 76, 83, 99, 221, 240;
WS:215, 270-4
11:91; WS:34, 64, 65, 70,  212, 216, 285
work WS:286
Voltaire,  Fran�ois  Marie  Arouet de
world, see reality
Document Outline
Contents
Introduction
Chronology
Further Reading
Human, All Too Human
Volume I
Preface
1 Of First and Last Things
2 On the History of the Moral Sensations
3 The Religious Life
4 From the Souls of Artists and Writers
5 Tokens of Higher and Lower Culture
6 Man in Society
7 Woman and Child
8 A Glance at the State
9 Man Alone with Himself
Among Friends: An Epilogue
Volume II
Preface
Part One Assorted Opinions and Maxims
Part Two The Wanderer and His Shadow
Index