TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS
and
THE ANTI-CHRIST
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE was born near Leipzig in 1844, the son of a Lutheran

clergyman. He attended the famous Pforta School, then went to university at Bonn
and at Leipzig, where he studied philology and read Schopenhauer. When he was
only twenty-four he was appointed to the chair of classical philology at Basle
University; he stayed there until his health forced him into retirement in 1879.
While at Basle he made and broke his friendship with Wagner, participated as an
ambulance orderly in the Franco-Prussian War, and published The Birth of Tragedy
(1872), Untimely Meditations (1873–6) and the first part of Human, All Too Human
(1878; two supplements entitled Assorted Opinions and Maxims and The Wanderer
and his Shadow followed in 1879 and 1880 respectively). From 1880 until his final
collapse in 1889, except for brief interludes, he divorced himself from everyday life
and, supported by his university pension, he lived mainly in France, Italy and
Switzerland. The Dawn appeared in 1881 followed by The Gay Science in the
autumn of 1882. Thus Spoke Zarathustra was written between 1883 and 1885, and
his last completed books were Ecce Homo, an autobiography, and Nietzsche contra
Wagner. He became insane in 1889 and remained in a condition of mental and
physical paralysis until his death in 1900.
MICHAEL TANNER was educated in the RAF and at Cambridge University, where

he was a Lecturer in Philosophy until 1997 and is a Fellow of Corpus Christi
College. He is equally interested in philosophy, music and literature, his particular
areas being Friedrich Nietzsche and Richard Wagner. He has written for many
journals, contributed ‘The Total Work of Art’ to The Wagner Companion, and is the
author of Nietzsche (1995) and Wagner (1996).
R. J. HOLLINGDALE translated eleven of Nietzsche’s books and published two

books about him; he also translated works by, among others, Schopenhauer,
Goethe, E. T. A. Hoffman, Lichtenberg and Theodor Fontane, many of these for
Penguin Classics. He was the honorary president of the British Nietzsche Society.
R. J. Hollingdale died on 28 September 2001. In its obituary The Times described
him as ‘Britain’s foremost postwar Nietzsche specialist’ and the Guardian paid
tribute to his ‘inspired gift for German translation’. Richard Gott wrote that he
‘brought fresh generations – through fluent and intelligent translation – to read and
relish Nietzsche’s inestimable thought’.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS
AND

THE ANTI-CHRIST
TRANSLATED BY
R. J. HOLLINGDALE
INTRODUCTION BY
MICHAEL TANNER
PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124,
Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi –
110 017, India
Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads, Albany, Auckland,
New Zealand
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South
Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
www.penguin.com
Götzen-Dämmerung first published 1889
Der Antichrist first published 1895
This translation published 1968
This edition with a new Introduction published 1990
Reprinted with a new Chronology and new Further Reading 2003
30
Translation and Translator’s Note copyright © R. J. Hollingdale, 1968
Introduction copyright © Michael Tanner, 1990
All rights reserved
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject
to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
EISBN: 978–0–141–90429–0

Contents
INTRODUCTION
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE
FURTHER READING
TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS or How to Philosophize with a Hammer
Foreword
Maxims and Arrows
The Problem of Socrates
‘Reason’ in Philosophy
How the ‘Real World’ at last Became a Myth
Morality as Anti-Nature
The Four Great Errors
The ‘Improvers’of Mankind
What the Germans Lack
Expeditions of an Untimely Man
What I Owe to the Ancients
The Hammer Speaks
THE ANTI-CHRIST
Foreword
The Anti-Christ
GLOSSARY OF NAMES
CHRONOLOGY

Introduction to
TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS
and
THE ANTI-CHRIST
Both these two brief, marvellous books were written during the latter half of 1888,
the last year of Friedrich Nietzsche’s sane life. In Ecce Homo, the highly eccentric
autobiography which he immediately went on to write after The Anti-Christ,
Nietzsche remarks at the end of the short chapter he devotes to Twilight, ‘I have
never experienced such an autumn, nor have I thought anything of the sort possible
on earth – a Claude Lorraine thought on to infinity, every day of the same excessive
perfection.’ In the epigraph to Ecce Homo, which he wrote himself, the note he
strikes is still more elegiac:
On this perfect day, when everything has become ripe and not only the grapes are growing
brown, a ray of sunlight has fallen on to my life… The first book of the Revaluation of all Values
[by which Nietzsche means The Anti-Christ], the Songs of Zarathustra… my attempt to
philosophize with a hammer [an allusion to the subtitle of Twilight] – all of them gifts of this year,
of its last quarter even! How should I not be grateful to my whole life?

To move from those expressions of gratitude to the two prose works they refer to
comes as a shock. For the tone of both Twilight and The Anti-Christ is
predominantly strident, even shrill, and many commentators, not just unsympathetic
ones, have registered distress at what strikes them as a self-betraying crudity and
oversimplification of the profound and somewhat more calmly expressed insights to
be found in his preceding books, especially in On the Genealogy of Morals written
only the previous year. Nietzsche’s self-apotheosis in Ecce Homo and his collapse
into insanity at the very beginning of 1889 are taken by these regretful readers as
sad confirmations of the deterioration discernible in these two soi-distant autumnal
products. Yet if one recognizes the irony of Ecce Homo and if one didn’t know of
Nietzsche’s impending madness, the difference of tone between these two books
and what preceded them might well not seem so great, and the incredible richness
of content which both of them possess might be more apparent.
It would be grotesque, of course, to deny that these books are, to put it at its
gentlest, eccentric. The arch Yes-sayer seems to be on remarkably negative form, as
both titles suggest. He even seems to be unclear on this matter himself. In number 6
of the section of Twilight entitled ‘What the Germans Lack’ he says, ‘To be true to
my nature, which is affirmative and has dealings with contradiction and criticism

only indirectly and when compelled…’, while in number 1 of the last section,
‘What I Owe to the Ancients’, he writes, rather more convincingly until the last
clause, ‘My taste, which may be called the opposite of a tolerant taste, is… far from
uttering a wholesale Yes: in general it dislikes saying Yes, it would rather say No,
most of all it prefers to say nothing at all’, and in the Foreword he claims that ‘This
little book is a grand declaration of war’, having just written – to confuse the issue
still further – that ‘This book… is above all a relaxation, a sunspot, an escapade into
the idle hours of a psychologist.’ It would perhaps be tactless, and giving hostages
to fortune, to press Nietzsche too hard about this; but it is strange that a book which
claims to demolish ‘Not merely eternal idols, also the youngest of all’ (his
characterization of it in Ecce Homo) should saunter into the world as ‘a relaxation’,
etc. And yet their apparent contradictoriness is also typical of both these books and
does force the question of whether Nietzsche was losing his grip or, more
interestingly and alarmingly, whether Twilight, which presents itself as a lightning
tour of his whole philosophy, doesn’t inadvertently serve the purpose of revealing
‘tensions’ (the charitable word used by kindly philosophical commentators) that had
all along been implicit in his thought.
Nietzsche is regularly rebuked by writers who strangely feel that consistency is
the most important philosophical virtue, or at least the sine qua non of a
philosopher’s deserving to be taken seriously, for his frequent vacillations between
injunctions to lightheartedness and dire prophecies of impending gloom, between
enjoining us to delight in surfaces and insisting that we plumb previously uncharted
depths. If he had philosophized with less of himself than he did, such charges would
be justified. But one has to ask how anyone who threw himself with such
completeness into his work as Nietzsche did, could possibly have neglected to
register as forcefully as he was able – which in his case means utterly – both the
attractions of insouciance and those of fanatical seriousness. If he had been an artist
– wholly an artist, instead of an artist-philosopher – he would have been spared this
criticism. No one blames Richard Wagner for moving straight on to Die
Meistersinger from Tristan and Isolde, except those who blame him for writing
either. The obvious retort to that, that an artist has the right to switch from a tragic
to a comic mode, and a strikingly different world view, while a philosopher doesn’t,
begs the question in the most spectacular way, certainly where Nietzsche is
concerned.
But this may seem unduly permissive. Is Nietzsche a Yes-sayer, or would he
rather say No? The answer is, I think, that at the deepest level even he (whom Freud
described as the person who knew more about himself than anyone else ever had or
ever would) didn’t know, or couldn’t make up his mind. Rightly he saw various
fundamental attitudes to life as warring temptations, and was unexampled in his

honesty in spelling out the reasons for and against adopting any of them. And as his
feelings about life accelerated in their alternations and became ever more intense, he
produced in the works under consideration the two greatest documents of basic
ambivalence that we possess.
Very early on in Twilight a striking example of Nietzsche’s apparently casual
contradictoriness occurs. Number 12 of the Maxims and Arrows reads, ‘If we
possess our why of life we can put up with almost any how. – Man does not strive
after happiness; only the Englishman does that.’ (This may also seem typical of
Twilight in combining a profound maxim with a cheap arrow, until we realize the
place that the unfortunate English have in Nietzsche’s by now highly schematized
demonology, which I shall be investigating later.) The last maxim of this part states,
‘Formula of my happiness: a Yes, a No, a straight line, a goal…’, while number 33
reads in part, ‘How little is needed for happiness! The note of a bagpipe. – Without
music life would be a mistake.’ If Nietzsche is so scornful of searching after
happiness, why should he tell us his formula for it? This kind of question,
inescapable for the attentive reader, pervades both these books. The truth of the
matter, I think, is that though Nietzsche appears to be making things as direct and
simple as possible, he is by now inveterately wedded to his old habit of using a
single term, in this case ‘happiness’, to denote both something of which he approves
and what he regards as its malignant shadow. The latter is invariably what most
people mean by the term, the former what they should mean.
In the latter part of the nineteenth century, ‘happiness’ was a term which had
virtually been taken over by utilitarians, for whom Nietzsche’s contempt was
limitless. The grounds of that contempt are multiple:
1. Insofar as utilitarians concerned themselves with the greatest happiness of the
greatest number, they were advocating something which for Nietzsche simply was
not worth having. For an equal distribution of happiness must mean a watering
down of its quality for anyone who possesses it.
2. The utilitarian conception of happiness further betrays itself in its suspect
relationship to Christian ideas on the subject. Nietzsche touches on both these points
when he writes in number 43 of The Anti-Christ:
‘Salvation of the soul’ – in plain words: ‘The world revolves around me’…. The poison of the
doctrine ‘equal rights for all’ – this has been more thoroughly sowed by Christianity than by
anything else; from the most secret recesses of base instincts, Christianity has waged a war to the
death against every feeling of reverence and distance between man and man, against, that is, the
precondition of every elevation, every increase in culture – it has forged out of the ressentiment
of the masses its chief weapon against us, against everything noble, joyful, high-spirited on earth,
against our happiness on earth….

3. Nietzsche regards the failure to draw a distinction between happiness and
contentment as especially disastrous; for him the only happiness worth having is
that which is the by-product of strenuous efforts in various directions, efforts
undertaken without a thought for the happiness they might produce.
If Nietzsche had bothered to read the utilitarians he would have seen that, at least
in respect of the third of these criticisms, Mill had explicitly, indeed notoriously,
claimed that it was better to be an unhappy wise man than a contented fool. But
Mill figures in Nietzsche’s list of ‘Impossibles’, where Nietzsche labels him at the
beginning of ‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’: ‘John Stuart Mill: or offensive
clarity.’ If he had been a little more patient with Mill – admittedly a difficult task,
and one to which he was temperamentally unsuited – he could have made his
critique more effective; or rather he could have applied to Mill the more balanced
critique which he does address elsewhere.
Why, if one is utilitarian, is it better to be miserable and wise than stupid and
contented? No answer which sustains the coherence of this doctrine has ever been
forthcoming, for utilitarianism is, in fact, in all its rich confusions, the result of
attempting to combine hopelessly irreconcilable elements. Its stress on equality
among all men is an inheritance of Christianity – and it is this element in
Christianity that horrifies Nietzsche as much as any other – while in its emphasis on
happiness in this life it negates the basic premiss of Christianity (at least as
Nietzsche sees it, and it is a view generally shared). To take the latter point: the
Christian Church, in opposition to its founder, has always been insistent on the
worthlessness of the things of this world – this is Nietzsche’s central argument in
The Anti-Christ. For a start they are transient, and that strong streak of Platonism in
Christianity (‘Christianity is Platonism for “the people”,’ Nietzsche writes in the
Preface to Beyond Good and Evil) had enforced the idea that anything that is not
eternal is without value. Not only is it their ephemerality which eliminates their
worth, but also those negative features dependent upon them: ambition, pride,
ruthlessness, together with achievement and creation itself, as human beings
understand it, are intelligible only in a world in which everything passes away. So
also, it might be retorted, are the Christian virtues of patience, fortitude and
remorse. True enough, yet they are all predicated on a future reward, just as the
vices are eternally punished. In short, because utilitarianism had emerged from
Christianity it attempted to apply to a world seen in a wholly secular way a set of
values that makes sense only in a religious, more specifically a Christian, context.
Hence, while upholding earthly happiness, it reflects its Christian legacy in its
condemnation of contented zombies – a condemnation Nietzsche shares, but which
he realizes that one must find radically new grounds to sustain.

Other central concepts of morality discussed by Nietzsche are also meaningful
only in a religious context. For instance, one of the most magnificent passages in
Twilight, indeed in all of Nietzsche’s writings, occurs in number 5 of the
‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’, where, attacking ‘G. Eliot’, a still more hapless
victim of his demonological schema, he writes:
They have got rid of the Christian God, and now feel obliged to cling all the more firmly to
Christian morality… In England, in response to every little emancipation from theology one has
to reassert one’s position in a fear-inspiring manner as a moral fanatic. That is the penance one
pays there. – With us it is different. When one gives up Christian belief one thereby deprives
oneself of the right to Christian morality. For the latter is absolutely not self-evident…
Christianity is a system, a consistently thought out and complete view of things. If one breaks out
of it a fundamental idea, the belief in God, one thereby breaks the whole thing to pieces:…
Christianity presupposes that man does not know, cannot know what is good for him and what
evil: he believes in God, who alone knows. Christian morality is a command: its origin is
transcendental; it is beyond all criticism, all right to criticize; it possesses truth only if God is truth
– it stands or falls with the belief in God. – If the English really do believe they will know, of
their own accord, ‘intuitively’, what is good and evil; if they consequently think they no longer
have need of Christianity as a guarantee of morality; that is merely the consequence of the
ascendancy of Christian evaluation and an expression of the strength and depth of this
ascendancy: so that the origin of English morality has been forgotten, so that the highly
conditional nature of its right to exist is no longer felt. For the Englishman morality is not yet a
problem…

Astonishingly accurate as this is about English moral philosophers of the last
hundred years, it seems unfair of Nietzsche to attack only them, when it applies at
least as much to post-Christians of other nations. But that hardly matters. What does
matter is the conclusiveness of the point Nietzsche is making. It applies equally to
Kant, whom Nietzsche does not spare in either of these two books. Indeed it applies
more to him. For he too gets rid of the Christian God as a foundation of morality,
only to reintroduce Him later on as a guarantee that virtue will pay, if not in this
world then in the next. Even readers who find much of what Nietzsche writes
unsympathetic must surely share his amazement, if not his indignation (though they
should share that too), when they contemplate a world from which God has been
eliminated but in which it is thought that we should behave just as people did, or
ought to have done, when He was still a pervasive presence. The trouble is that our
conception of human nature has failed to alter: we still derive it from seeing
ourselves as creatures, obliged to obey the dictates of our Creator. This view of
ourselves is so difficult to overcome – where do we look to find an alternative one?
– and the very idea of ourselves as being continuous with the rest of nature is so
reductive, that we mostly lazily stick with our Christian inheritance, which we

persuade ourselves is the ‘natural’ view to take. But at the same time we realize that
something is amiss, so we tinker around in an ad hoc sort of way, holding on to
such concepts as ‘rights’ and ‘equality’, jettisoning or tacitly ignoring others that we
find inconvenient. The result, in Nietzsche’s view, is a moral and spiritual vulgarity
so depressing that he has to stage a one-man, non-stop demonstration of exaltation.
Though Twilight ranges very widely, taking in every theme that Nietzsche ever
dealt with, there can’t be any question that at each point he is preparing the ground
for his final attack on Christianity. It is – the whole brief book – very much a matter
of reculer pour mieux sauter. And although, reading The Anti-Christ immediately
afterwards, one has a strong sense of more of the same, this book was actually
intended to be the first instalment of his Revaluation of All Values, which was itself
to be in four parts and to present his philosophy in its most definitive form so far –
an ambitious project, even if he had not become insane. Nietzsche was touchingly
addicted to plans and titles, most of which were abandoned. What is amazing is the
sureness of touch with which, in both these books, he surveys the contemporary
cultural scene, in addition to many other topics, and pulls all the threads together. It
is in pursuance of this dynamic unity that he uses names with such dramatic
unfairness. Never scrupulous, let alone ‘scholarly’, in his portrayal of individuals,
he reaches new heights of recklessness in these works, with the signal exception of
his treatment of Christ, as we shall see. But it would be a terrible pity if this
unfairness were to blind one to the essential points that he is making. If accuracy
were at issue, Nietzsche is no more accurate in his portrayal of his heroes than he is
of his villains. The whole enterprise has to be seen in terms of lining up his troops
to fight the enemy, and it is a central part of his project that his own forces are
enormously but not hopelessly outnumbered.
Both books should be read under the aspect of the last words of Ecce Homo:
‘Have I been understood? – Dionysos against the Crucified…’ Dionysos had, of
course, always been his name for what he regarded as the element in life which was
most fearful but also which vindicated it; ‘The Crucified’ is a comparatively late
piece of nomenclature for its opposite. But in fact to put the contrast in these terms
is misleading and has certainly resulted in much misunderstanding, even among
those who aren’t hostile to Nietzsche’s general position. For Dionysos has two
opponents, one worthy of him, the other contemptible. The name Nietzsche gives to
his worthy opponent is Christ – hence Dionysos is the Anti-Christ. But as
translators of the eponymous work have pointed out, in German ‘Der Antichrist’
can mean either ‘The Anti-Christ’ or ‘The Anti-Christian’. I think that it was
intended to mean both. The Christian can be seen as the unworthy opponent of
Dionysos, the squalid enemy who is too ubiquitous to be ignored, but who is
undeservedly dignified by being treated to such elaborate condemnation. Similarly,

it is Christianity, not Christ, of which Nietzsche writes in the closing passage of The
Anti-Christ that it is ‘the one great curse, the one great intrinsic depravity, the one
great instinct for revenge for which no expedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret,
subterranean, petty – I call it the one immortal blemish of mankind…’ In the central
sections of the book Nietzsche goes to great pains to distinguish between Christ and
everyone who has used his name for whatever purposes. So, to simplify slightly,
The Anti-Christ constitutes an attack on both Christ and Christians, while Twilight
makes its assault on the exceedingly complex set of motives, feelings, attitudes and
longings which have ensured that ‘in reality there has been only one Christian, and
he died on the Cross’ (The Anti-Christ, number 39).
To make this point clearer, it is necessary to go back to Nietzsche’s first book,
The Birth of Tragedy, as indeed he does in number 6 of the section of Twilight
entitled ‘ “Reason” in Philosophy’, where he enunciates four propositions, the
fourth of which runs:
To divide the world into a ‘real’ and an ‘apparent’ world, whether in the manner of Christianity
or in the manner of Kant (which is, after all, that of a cunning Christian –) is only a suggestion of
décadence – a symptom of declining life… That the artist places a higher value on appearance
than on reality constitutes no objection to this proposition. For ‘appearance’ here signifies reality
once more, only selected, strengthened, corrected… The tragic artist is not a pessimist – it is
precisely he who affirms all that is questionable and terrible in existence, he is Dionysian…

Certainly, this is not exactly the way he put it in The Birth of Tragedy, but the
difference is not damaging, at least not for present purposes: on the contrary, it
strengthens his position. For the central positive point that Nietzsche is making
here, that the Dionysian artist affirms precisely what we are all most tempted to
deny, is something to which he always held firm. But in The Birth of Tragedy ‘the
terrible’ had denoted something glamorous, the underlying and mainly appalling
substratum of existence which we are usually unable to face, but which the
phenomenon of tragedy forces us to face. In the sixteen years between The Birth of
Tragedy and Twilight, Nietzsche had abandoned the metaphysics which enabled him
to postulate that substratum, while finding that ‘the terrible’ was more terrible than
he had thought, because it wasn’t at all glamorous. It was everything that makes
small what should be great, that saps life and will, that ministers to what Nietzsche,
in his last works, came to sum up, in the word (he always puts it in French)
décadence. And, with only an appearance of paradox, he found it more frightful
than the metaphysical horrors that he had evoked in The Birth of Tragedy.
So, now that Nietzsche has told us, perhaps a little more offhandedly than the
importance of the subject warrants, that ‘ “appearance” here signifies reality once
more, only selected, strengthened, corrected’ he sets about doing the selecting and

the correcting in order – and this is the absolutely crucial point – that he should be
able to effect a final volte-face and return to his original conception of ‘the terrible’,
only purged of its Schopenhauerian-Wagnerian overtones or undertones. In other
words, he now wants to denote by ‘the terrible’ those elements in existence which
are very nearly unendurable, but the enduring and the overcoming of which lead to
an increase in strength or will. The version of ‘the terrible’ which is in one way
worse is that which leads to debility and a sense of impoverished life. It is not the
role of the Dionysian artist or philosopher to affirm that – it is their job to expose
and extirpate it. The twilight of the idols, whether eternal or modern, is at hand.
It is in this sense that Nietzsche is driven, against many explicit resolutions to the
contrary, to be a No-sayer. For what the décadents who surround him are doing is
to say No where they should be saying Yes, where they should be Dionysian; and
what is leading them to this life-denying perversity, mostly of course unconsciously,
is that they subscribe to a set of values that puts the central features of this world at
a discount. Where they find suffering, they immediately look for someone to blame,
and end up hating themselves, or generalize that into a hatred of ‘human nature’.
They look for ‘peace of mind’, using it as a blanket term and failing to see the
diversity of states, some of them desirable and some of them the reverse, which that
term covers. They confuse cause and effect, thinking that the connection between
virtue and happiness is that the former leads to the latter, whereas in fact the reverse
is the case. They have, in Nietzsche’s cruelly accurate phrase, ‘the vulgar ambition
to possess generous feelings’ (‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’, number 6). They
confuse breeding fine men with taming them. Throughout the major part of Twilight
this devastating list of our vulgarities continues.
It goes without saying that most of Nietzsche’s readers will find reasons not to be
devastated. At most they will claim to find it all very stimulating, or say that they
would do if Nietzsche could be a little calmer and less abusive. But really
Nietzsche’s impudence (he called Richard Wagner ‘the impolitest of geniuses’ –
The Case of Wagner, section 1 – when he should clearly have reserved that title for
himself) gives them the excuse to ignore the substance of what he is alleging. His
own obsession with moral and intellectual hygiene guaranteed that throughout his
life he remained aghast at and incredulous of the degree of self-deception and
willingness to believe what suits them that almost everyone routinely practises. By
the time he wrote his last works he had behind him a uniquely impressive series of
books, especially Human, All Too Human, Daybreak and supremely The Gay
Science, in which he had employed scrupulous analysis, teasing and satire, lyrical
depth psychology; and no one had given a damn. So he produced this ‘grand
declaration of war’, but this merely served to make people feel that they had been
right all along to ignore him. His only consolation was that since he was speaking to

décadents they would of course disagree with whatever he said. But how does one
succeed in getting under the skin of a décadent? How does one reveal to vulgar
people the catastrophic effects of their vulgarity? How does one effect any truly
radical conversion in people’s consciousness, especially if they are not particularly
unhappy? Only, it would seem, by producing in them an experience so devastating
that our paramount example of it is Saint Paul’s experience on the road to
Damascus – something that was never far from Nietzsche’s mind when he was
writing these books. And although he was desperate to achieve a similar effect, he
was horrified at the way in which it was produced on that world-historical occasion.
But suppose that, for all our initial resistance, we try to take Twilight seriously,
and not as a kind of spiritual thriller or whodunit. We might begin by agreeing that
some of his milder claims are, at the very least, plausible. It does seem to be true,
for example, that most people, when they find something has gone wrong, do look
for someone to blame quite as soon as they look for a way of putting it right.
Equally, people who lack the advantages that others have form intense resentments
against the ‘privileged’, claiming that they (the non-privileged) are being denied
their ‘rights’. Such movements of the soul are, it would seem, ‘natural’; Nietzsche
is not in the least disposed to deny that. What he loathes is the way in which such
attitudes of vengefulness and ressentiment are used as the linchpins of moral
systems. It is inevitable that they should be, at any rate when the gulf between the
haves and the have-nots is sufficiently obtrusive and when there are sufficiently
skilful people around to work on the feelings of deprivation in the majority. But as a
result a set of values is inaugurated in which these feelings of an essentially hostile
kind are institutionalized as the sole morality for humanity. It goes without saying
that there are other factors which constitute the basic elements of the kind of
morality that Nietzsche is particularly opposed to a – ‘slave’ or ‘herd’ morality –
but he is tirelessly insistent on the crucial role of these feelings of deprivation. Not
that we are consistent on this score. Take the case of jealousy: it is widely and
rightly taken to be a destructive and corrosive emotion liable to have catastrophic
effects both on those who suffer from it and, as a likely consequence, on the object
or objects of their jealousy. We regard it with horror and alarm both because its
destructiveness is so blatant, and because the context in which it typically arises is
one in which the objects of jealousy are not to blame for being its cause. Still, it
seems to be as ‘natural’ as any emotion we have. And yet it is hard to see what the
difference is between jealousy and those other feelings which give rise to morality
as we most commonly know it. We can take the argument a painful stage further:
someone (a ‘decent’ person) who recognizes the degrading effects of jealousy may
decide to try to escape from them by behaving in a ‘noble’ way: he forswears the
courses of action which he feels driven to follow, and indulges ‘the vulgar ambition

to have generous feelings’ (‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’, number 6). (Hegel
had already expounded this dialectic of feeling and action in The Phenomenology of
Spirit. Nietzsche often echoes Hegel, but almost certainly without realizing it.) How
can we escape from this whole ghastly and spiritually debilitating cycle of feeling?
Only by denying the process in its very beginnings, which will involve, among
other things, seeing that the ‘nobility’ of the person feeling and acting within this
kind of morality (which we tend to regard as morality per se) is a very different
matter from the genuine nobility of the person who recognizes the true conditions of
existence from the start; who recognizes that there are, as Nietzsche often puts it, no
‘moral facts’, no ‘natural rights’ to which we can lay claim, no valid concept of
blame.
Who would such a person be? It isn’t surprising that Nietzsche found it necessary
to coin the term Übermensch (usually, if unfortunately, rendered as ‘Superman’).
For, as I have already argued, our concept of what human nature is is so permeated
with our moral concepts that to attempt to sort out the one from the other is by now
almost certainly vain. In the course of these two books Nietzsche, although
primarily on the warpath, gives fairly detailed accounts of two kinds of person that
he finds it impossible to condemn as incarnations, of however ‘sublimated’ (a
favourite, and very influential, term of his) a kind, of morality as it is ordinarily
understood. One of these kinds of person truly deserves the title of Superman, even
if there hasn’t yet been a complete example of it. The other class contains only one
member, and that is Christ, at least as seen by Nietzsche in his idiosyncratic but
extraordinarily powerful and moving depiction of him in the central stretch of The
Anti-Christ. It is this second kind of person whom Nietzsche feels is sufficiently
impressive to be his arch-opponent: Dionysos against the Crucified.
It is in number 28 of The Anti-Christ that Nietzsche touches ‘for the first time…
on the problem of the psychology of the redeemer’. The point of his doing so is to
contrast him with the type of the priest, who figures in this book as the arch-villain
though not the arch-opponent. The priest is, in Nietzsche’s violently abusive
account, the embodiment of meanness seeking, all too successfully, to persuade his
flock (which comes dangerously close to being coextensive with the Western world)
to live their lives wholly in accordance with the concepts of fear and loathing. By
contrast the redeemer, from now on referred to by Nietzsche as Jesus, lives entirely
without rancour or vindictiveness. This is no news: but Nietzsche observes that, in
attempting to categorize such an extraordinary, indeed unique, being, theologians,
of whom he singles out Renan for special derision, have appropriated for their
‘explication of the type Jesus the two most inapplicable concepts possible in this
case: the concept of the genius and the concept of the hero’. He immediately
continues in number 29:

But if anything is unevangelic it is the concept hero. Precisely the opposite of all contending, of
all feeling oneself in struggle has here become instinct: the incapacity for resistance here becomes
morality (‘resist not evil!’: the profoundest saying of the Gospel, its key in a certain sense),
blessedness in peace, in gentleness, in the inability for enmity. What are the ‘glad tidings’? True
life, eternal life is found – it is not promised, it is here, it is within you: as life lived in love, in love
without deduction or exclusion, without distance. Everyone is a child of God – Jesus definitely
claims nothing for himself alone – as a child of God everyone is equal to everyone else…. To
make a hero of Jesus! – And what a worse misunderstanding is the word ‘genius’!

The idiosyncrasies of Nietzsche’s interpretation of Christ’s character are obvious,
but then any attempt to extract an intelligible portrayal of him from the gospels is
bound to be selective. What takes one by surprise is the nature of Nietzsche’s
selectivity. As his eight-page account continues – he does a good deal more than
merely ‘touching on’ the psychology of the redeemer – the tone becomes ever
warmer and even ecstatic. The portrayal of Nietzsche’s (or Dionysos’s) antipode
becomes, bizarrely, one of the most moving passages in the whole of his writings.
With the occasional omission, it could be used as a magnificent sermon addressed
to a devout congregation.
The omissions which would have to be made are crucial; from time to time in this
piece of exalted prose Nietzsche refers to Jesus as an idiot, though his use of that
term is clearly influenced by Nietzsche’s belated discovery of Dostoyevsky, to
whom he refers favourably several times, but only in these two books. Jesus is also
described as a décadent, and as a case of retarded puberty. These descriptions are
undoubtedly sincere, yet the fact remains that Nietzsche is obviously at least as
much in love with the portrayal of the redeemer that he finds himself giving as he is
with that of Socrates, that other sublime opponent, with whom he had a still more
protracted affair of the spirit. Both of them fascinated him, partly by virtue of
possessing natures which didn’t say No simply because they could not conceive of
an alternative morality, which, had they been able to, would have both horrified and
fatally corrupted them. If one can’t have innocence – a matter about which
Nietzsche never made up his mind – at least ignorance, or certain species of it, is
the next best thing. In the end it won’t do, of course, and certainly not for someone
with such paralysingly absolute demands on life as Nietzsche. But lacking a
paradigm of genuine innocence, he reverted at several crucial places in his writings
to the appeal of ‘pure folly’. Not that he could use that phrase in a. positive sense,
since Wagner had preempted it in his characterization of Parsifal, for whom
Nietzsche had nothing but scorn. So he uses instead the closely related image of the
child.
The most celebrated place in which he does that is the passage in the first section

of ‘Zarathustra’s Discourses’ in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, where he describes the
three metamorphoses of the spirit and concludes that it is in its ideal state when,
having shed the weights of the camel and the ferocities of the lion, it becomes a
child. Many readers of that passage must have rubbed their eyes and wondered
whether it is a planned effect, so unmistakably to echo the words of Christ.
Nietzsche’s point, I think, though he doesn’t make it explicitly, is that we must
retain the innocence of the child as we mature. But is that possible? Whatever his
answer, the point about Christ is that he wants us to remain as little children, just as
(according to Nietzsche) he himself did in crucial and finally damaging respects.
Christ didn’t suffer from passions, because he didn’t have any, at any rate not the
ones that usually accompany adulthood. Thus he was unacquainted with sin and
guilt, and his evangel is utterly uncombative. ‘If I understand anything of this great
symbolist’, Nietzsche writes in number 34 of The Anti-Christ, ‘it is that he took for
realities, for “truths”, only inner realities.’ The idea of cultivating pure inwardness,
freed from any external demands, including that of physical culture (in both these
books Nietzsche is very emphatic about the primacy of the body), is clearly one that
Nietzsche found very attractive, mainly because of the central place that music
played in his life, so long as music is regarded as the most intense form of
inwardness that we can possess without importing large quantities of metaphysics
and religion. For he insisted, finally, on regarding it as the ultimate refreshment of
the hard-worked spirit, and not as a source of truth – in which latter role it would
lead us straight back to Schopenhauer and Wagner. But to cultivate inwardness and
nothing more, as Christ did, is to avoid life in an absolute, in its way glorious, but
ultimately perverse fashion. Indeed, no one but Christ managed to do it. He was
bound to be comprehensively misunderstood, and the history of Christianity is a
history of misunderstanding. ‘This “bringer of glad tidings” died as he lived, as he
taught – not to “redeem mankind” but to demonstrate how one ought to live. What
he bequeathed to mankind is his practice’ (number 35, The Anti-Christ).
Inevitably Christ’s disciples, and especially Paul, didn’t see things that way,
according to Nietzsche. They turned action into doctrine, mistook symbols for facts,
and produced the most repulsive set of teachings known to mankind (not, alas, that
mankind was disposed or able to recognize them for what they were). After the
haunting beauty of the pages dedicated to Christ, Nietzsche returns sadly to his
overriding theme. The beginning of number 38 runs: ‘At this point I shall not
suppress a sigh. There are days when I am haunted by a feeling blacker than the
blackest melancholy – contempt of man. And so as to leave no doubt as to what I
despise, whom I despise: it is the man of today, the man with whom I am fatefully
contemporary.’ Most of the rest of the book is devoted to attacking Christianity in
its institutional form, and especially the way in which it has corrupted

consciousness to such an extent that it isn’t even true to its own vile self. Nietzsche
is embarrassed at the obviousness of the point he is making in number 38:
Everyone knows this: and everyone none the less remains unchanged. Where have the last
feelings of decency and self-respect gone when even our statesmen, in other ways very
unprejudiced kind of men and practical anti-Christians through and through, still call themselves
Christians today and go to Communion?… A young prince at the head of his regiments, splendid
as the expression of his people’s egoism and presumption – but without any shame professing
himself a Christian!… Whom then does Christianity deny? what does it call ‘world’?

The charge is unanswerable: we are faced with a debasement of a debasement of
something fundamentally life-denying. No wonder Nietzsche became a hermit.
Dionysos against the Crucified… But who might be Dionysos? Who is adequate
to command the imagination in the face of a symbol as profound as that of Christ on
the Cross? Especially when our imaginations are permeated by that symbol,
however comprehensively we have betrayed it. Nietzsche has either to find an
exemplary anti-Christian from the past, or to postulate a kind of figure who hasn’t
yet existed. He had tried the latter in Zarathustra, with questionable success. In
these last books he resorts to two historical figures, the first of them a notorious
product of the Renaissance, the second ‘a grand attempt to overcome the eighteenth
century through a return to nature, through a going-up to the naturalness of the
Renaissance, a kind of self-overcoming on the part of that century’. This second
figure is, of course, Goethe, and number 49 of ‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’ is
a magnificent celebration of him. The first figure is Cesare Borgia, no doubt chosen
partly for shock-value, but also because Nietzsche did – all his references to Borgia
show it – have a genuine admiration for him as an embodiment of the Renaissance,
which he interprets as: ‘The revaluation of Christian values, the attempt, undertaken
with every expedient, with every instinct, with genius of every kind, to bring about
the victory of the opposing values, the noble values…’ (The Anti-Christ, number
61). It becomes a bit clearer why Nietzsche should have been so determinedly
provocative: ‘Cesare Borgia as Pope… Am I understood?… Very well, that would
have been a victory of the only sort I desire today: Christianity would thereby have
been abolished!’ (number 61). My only criticism of this is that Nietzsche seems to
be far too retrospectively hopeful. When one thinks of what Christianity has
survived, it seems unlikely that anyone or anything could abolish it. Nor is it clear
that if an adequate Dionysos-figure appeared he wouldn’t suffer the same fate that
afflicts all great men – he would acquire disciples, whether or not he wanted them –
and if he were truly great, he wouldn’t want them. And once again there would be a
new ‘-ism’, most of whose members would be mean and degrading, because most
people are. Nietzsche wanted to envisage a figure so prodigiously magnificent that

he could not be traduced. Even the furious pages of these two books show that he
still hoped for such a person, and for the transformation of consciousness that he
might achieve. If the word ‘pathetic’ can ever be applied to Nietzsche – it is
certainly the last term he would have found tolerable – it would be for his optimism
about man, in the face of our accumulated record of mean-spiritedness, which no
one knew better than he did.
MICHAEL TANNER

Translator’s Note
Nietzsche was born in Röcken, a village in Prussian Saxony, in 1844. His father and
both grandfathers were Lutheran pastors and as a boy he was a pious believer. He
attended Pforta school, the Rugby of Prussia, from 1858 to 1864, and then went to
Bonn and subsequently Leipzig University (1864–9). At Bonn he studied theology
but gave it up when he lost his religious faith; he continued as a student of
philology and gained so great a reputation in it that he was appointed to the chair of
classical philology at Basel University at the age of twenty-four before having
obtained his doctorate, which was awarded him by Leipzig without examination. He
taught at Basel for ten years (1869–79), becoming a Swiss to do so, and published
his earliest books: The Birth of Tragedy (1872) and the four Untimely Meditations
(1873–6). He also became a ‘disciple’ of Richard Wagner and devoted much time
and energy to assisting in establishing the Bayreuth Festival, which was inaugurated
in 1876. But by that time Nietzsche had come to think he had been mistaken in
seeing in Wagner the new saviour of German art, and this disillusionment,
combined with his sense that the newly established Reich was a victory for
philistinism, turned him against all things German and he became year by year more
critical of the ‘new Germany’ (see ‘What the Germans Lack’ in Twilight).
In 1876 he began writing Human, All Too Human, and when it appeared in 1878
his breach with his past was complete. A year later he suffered an almost total
collapse of health and was compelled to abandon his university career: for the next
ten years he lived in a state of recurring ill-health which culminated in final collapse
and insanity. During these years he wrote all his important books, living in lodgings
and hotel rooms mainly in Switzerland and Italy. He was for that decade certainly
one of the loneliest of men, though fundamentally he liked and needed solitude. He
never married.
The Birth of Tragedy and the first of the Untimely Meditations won him a certain
small notoriety, but his subsequent books fell dead from the press – only 170 copies
of Human, All Too Human were sold during its first year – and from the fourth part
of Zarathustra onwards he had to pay for their publication himself (which he could
ill afford to do). Until the end of 1887, in spite of having produced a series of books
without equal in the German literature of their time and now world-famous, he was
virtually unknown. In 1888 he began to acquire a name: a few, mainly hostile
articles were written about him in journals, and the Danish critic Georg Brandes
lectured in Copenhagen on his works. But it was not until the 1890s that the public
in Germany and abroad became aware of him, and then his reputation suddenly
soared, so that by 1900 he was famous, not to say notorious. Of this he knew

nothing, having become mentally a child again. Alone, ill and unsuccessful,
Nietzsche in the 1880s is however not a figure to pity: in one book after another,
couched in a style it must have been a perpetual delight to realize, he celebrated as
no one else has ever done the splendour, power and joy of life.
Note on the Text
Götzen-Dämmerung, oder: Wie man mit dem Hammer philosophiert was published
by C. G. Naumann of Leipzig in January 1889, a few weeks after Nietzsche’s
collapse. It was the last book Nietzsche himself saw printed. It was written between
the end of June and the beginning of September 1888, with the foreword, the
chapter ‘What the Germans Lack’ and some of the ‘Expeditions of an Untimely
Man’ added at the end of September, and it was printed by the end of October. The
book originally bore the title Müssiggang eines Psychologen (A Psychologist’s
Leisure, or The Idle Hours of a Psychologist): this modest title was objected to by
Nietzsche’s enthusiastic admirer Peter Gast, who urged him to find something more
‘splendid’; Nietzsche acceded to this request with a parody of Wagner’s
Götterdämmerung (Twilight of the Gods). The change seems to have been made
while the book was already being set up in type (the title page of the manuscript
from which it was set is missing, indicating perhaps that Nietzsche had taken it back
to make the alteration and that it was subsequently mislaid), and this explains a few
otherwise puzzling references to the superseded title in the text.
Der Antichrist was written between 3 and 30 September 1888, immediately after
the completion of Twilight. It was first intended as the first part of The Revaluation
of all Values: a plan for that book which has been preserved reads: ‘Revaluation of
all Values. Book 1: The Anti-Christ. Attempt at a Critique of Christianity. Book 2:
The Free Spirit. Critique of Philosophy as a Nihilistic Movement. Book 3: The
Immoralist. Critique of the Most Fatal Kind of Ignorance, Morality. Book 4:
Dionysos. Philosophy of Eternal Recurrence.’ There are two surviving manuscript
title pages of The Anti-Christ: the earlier follows the above plan: The Anti-Christ.
Attempt at a Critique of Christianity. Book One of the Revaluation of all Values,
and was presumably written on 3 September. The later one reads: The Anti-Christ.
Revaluation of all Values, but the subtitle has been crossed out and A Curse on
Christianity substituted. The book was first published in 1895, in volume VIII of
the Gesamtausgabe in Grossoktav (Naumann, Leipzig); a small number of
omissions from the text were subsequently published and are restored in Karl
Schlechta’s edition (Werke in drei Bänden, vol. II, 1955).
R. J. HOLLINGDALE

FURTHER READING
David B. Allison, Reading the New Nietzsche (2001)
MaudeMarie Clark, Nietzsche on Truth and Morality (1990)
R. J. Hollingdale, Nietzsche: The Man and His Philosophy (1965; 1999)
Brian Leiter, Nietzsche on Morality (2002)
Bernd Magnus and Kathleen Higgins (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to
Nietzsche (1996)
Alexander Nehemas, Nietzsche: Life as Literature (1985)
F. Nietzsche, Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality, trans. R. J.
Hollingdale, introduction by M. Tanner (1982)
______, Dithyrambs of Dionysus, trans, with introduction and notes R. J.
Hollingdale (1984; 2001)
______, Untimely Meditations, trans. R. J. Hollingdale, introduction by J. P. Stern
(1983)
John Richardson and Brian Leiter (eds.), Nietzsche (2001)
Rudiger Safranski, Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography, trans. Shelley Frisch
(2002)
Henry Staten, Nietzsche’s Voice (1990)
Tracy Strong, Friedrich Nietzsche and the Politics of Transfiguration (1988)

TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS
or How to Philosophize with
a Hammer

Foreword
To stay cheerful when involved in a gloomy and exceedingly responsible business is
no inconsiderable art: yet what could be more necessary than cheerfulness? Nothing
succeeds in which high spirits play no part. Only excess of strength is proof of
strength. – A revaluation of all values, this question-mark so black, so huge it casts
a shadow over him who sets it up – such a destiny of a task compels one every
instant to run out into the sunshine so as to shake off a seriousness grown all too
oppressive. Every expedient for doing so is justified, every ‘occasion’ a joyful
occasion.* Above all, war. War has always been the grand sagacity of every spirit
which has grown too inward and too profound; its curative power lies even in the
wounds one receives. A maxim whose origin I withhold from learned curiosity has
long been my motto:
increscunt animi, virescit volnere virtus.†
Another form of recovery, in certain cases even more suited to me, is to sound
out idols.… There are more idols in the world than there are realities: that is my
‘evil eye’ for this world, that is also my ‘evil ear’.… For once to pose questions
here with a hammer and perhaps to receive for answer that famous hollow sound
which speaks of inflated bowels – what a delight for one who has ears behind his
ears – for an old psychologist and pied piper like me, in presence of whom precisely
that which would like to stay silent has to become audible…
This book too* – the title betrays it† – is above all a relaxation, a sunspot, an
escapade into the idle hours of a psychologist. Perhaps also a new war? And are
new idols sounded out?… This little book is a grand declaration of war; and as
regards the sounding-out of idols, this time they are not idols of the age but eternal
idols which are here touched with the hammer as with a tuning fork – there are no
more ancient idols in existence.… Also none more hollow.… That does not prevent
their being the most believed in; and they are not, especially in the most eminent
case, called idols…
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

Turin, 30 September 1888,
on the day the first book of the
Revaluation of all Values was
completed.

Maxims and Arrows
1. Idleness is the beginning of psychology. What? could psychology be – a vice?
2. Even the bravest of us rarely has the courage for what he really knows…
3. To live alone one must be an animal or a god – says Aristotle. There is yet a
third case: one must be both – a philosopher.
4. ‘All truth is simple’ – Is that not a compound lie? –
5. Once and for all, there is a great deal I do not want to know. – Wisdom sets
bounds even to knowledge.
6. It is by being ‘natural’ that one best recovers from one’s unnaturalness, from
one’s spirituality…
7. Which is it? Is man only God’s mistake or God only man’s mistake? –
8. From the military school of life. – What does not kill me makes me stronger.
9. Help thyself: then everyone will help thee too. Principle of Christian charity.
10. Let us not be cowardly in face of our actions! Let us not afterwards leave
them in the lurch! – Remorse of conscience is indecent.
11. Can an ass be tragic? – To be crushed by a burden one can neither bear nor
throw off?… The case of the philosopher.
12. If we possess our why of life we can put up with almost any how. – Man does
not strive after happiness; only the Englishman does that.
13. Man created woman – but what out of? Out of a rib of his God, of his
‘ideal’…
14. What? you are seeking? you want to multiply yourself by ten, by a hundred?
you are seeking followers? – Seek noughts! –*
15. Posthumous men – like me, for instance – are not so well understood as
timely† men, but they are listened to better. More precisely: we are never
understood – and hence our authority…
16. Among women. – ‘Truth? Oh, you don’t know the truth, do you! Is it not an
outrage on all out pudeurs?’ –
17. This is an artist as an artist should be, modest in his requirements: there are
only two things he really wants, his bread and his art – panem et Circen…‡
18. He who does not know how to put his will into things at least puts a meaning

into them: that is, he believes there is a will in them already (principle of ‘belief’).
19. What? you have chosen virtue and the heaving bosom, yet at the same time
look with envy on the advantages enjoyed by those who live for the day? – But with
virtue one renounces ‘advantage’… (laid at the door of an anti-Semite).
20. The complete woman perpetrates literature in the same way as she perpetrates
a little sin: as an experiment, in passing, looking around to see if someone notices
and so that someone may notice…
21. To get into only those situations in which illusory virtues are of no use, but in
which, like the tightrope-walker on his rope, one either falls or stands – or gets
off…
22. ‘Bad men have no songs’.* – How is it the Russians have songs?
23. ‘German spirit’:† for eighteen years‡ a contradictio in adjecto.§
24. In order to look for beginners one becomes a crab. The historian looks
backwards; at last he also believes backwards.
25. Contentment protects one even from catching a cold. Has a woman who knew
she was well dressed ever caught a cold? – I am assuming she was hardly dressed at
all.
26. I mistrust all systematizers and avoid them. The will to a system is a lack of
integrity.
27. Women are considered deep – why? because one can never discover any
bottom to them. Women are not even shallow.
28. If a woman possesses manly virtues one should run away from her; and if she
does not possess them she runs away herself.
29. ‘How much the conscience formerly had to bite on! || what good teeth it had!
– And today? what’s the trouble?’ – A dentist’s question.
30. One seldom commits only one rash act. In the first rash act one always does
too much. For just that reason one usually commits a second – and then one does
too little…
31. When it is trodden on a worm will curl up.* That is prudent. It thereby
reduces the chance of being trodden on again. In the language of morals: humility. –
32. Hatred of lies and dissembling may arise out of a sensitive notion of honour;
the same hatred may arise out of cowardice, in as much as lying is forbidden by
divine command. Too cowardly to tell lies…
33. How little is needed for happiness! The note of a bagpipe. – Without music

life would be a mistake. The German even thinks of God as singing songs.†
34. On ne peut penser et écrire qu’assis ‡ (G. Flaubert). – Now I have you,
nihilist! Assiduity§ is the sin against the holy spirit. Only ideas won by walking
have any value.
35. There are times when we are like horses, we psychologists, and grow restive:
we see our own shadow moving up and down before us. The psychologist has to
look away from himself in order to see at all.
36. Whether we immoralists do virtue any harm? – As little as anarchists do
princes. Only since they have been shot at do they again sit firmly on their thrones.
Moral: one must shoot at morals.
37. You run on ahead? – Do you do so as a herdsman? or as an exception? A
third possibility would be as a deserter.… First question of conscience.
38. Are you genuine? or only an actor? A representative? or that itself which is
represented? – Finally you are no more than an imitation of an actor.… Second
question of conscience.
39. The disappointed man speaks. – I sought great human beings, I never found
anything but the apes of their ideal.
40. Are you one who looks on? or who sets to work? – or who looks away, turns
aside.… Third question of conscience.
41. Do you want to accompany? or go on ahead? or go off alone?… One must
know what one wants and that one wants. – Fourth question of conscience.
42. For me they were steps, I have climbed up upon them – therefore I had to
pass over them. But they thought I wanted to settle down on them…
43. What does it matter that I am proved right! I am too much in the right. – And
he who laughs best today will also laugh last.
44. Formula of my happiness: a Yes, a No, a straight line, a goal…

The Problem of Socrates
1
In every age the wisest have passed the identical judgement on life: it is worthless.
… Everywhere and always their mouths have uttered the same sound – a sound full
of doubt, full of melancholy, full of weariness with life, full of opposition to life.
Even Socrates said as he died: ‘To live – that means to be a long time sick: I owe a
cock to the saviour Asclepius’.* Even Socrates had had enough of it. – What does
that prove? What does it point to? – Formerly one would have said (– oh, and did
say, and loudly enough, and our pessimists† most of all!): ‘Here at any rate there
must be something true! The consensus sapientium ‡ is proof of truth.’ – Shall we
still speak thus today? are we allowed to do so? ‘Here at any rate there must be
something sick’ – this is our retort: one ought to take a closer look at them, these
wisest of every age! Were they all of them perhaps no longer steady on their legs?
belated? tottery? décadents? Does wisdom perhaps appear on earth as a raven which
is inspired by the smell of carrion?…

2
This irreverent notion that the great sages are declining types first dawned on me in
regard to just the case in which learned and unlearned prejudice is most strongly
opposed to it: I recognized Socrates and Plato as symptoms of decay, as agents of
the dissolution of Greece, as pseudo-Greek, as anti-Greek (Birth of Tragedy,
1872).*. That consensus sapientium – I saw more and more clearly – proves least of
all that they were right about what they were in accord over: it proves rather that
they themselves, these wisest men, were in some way in physiological accord since
they stood – had to stand – in the same negative relation to life. Judgements, value
judgements concerning life, for or against, can in the last resort never be true: they
possess value only as symptoms, they come into consideration only as symptoms –
in themselves such judgements are stupidities. One must reach out and try to grasp
this astonishing finesse, that the value of life cannot be estimated. Not by a living
man, because he is a party to the dispute, indeed its object, and not the judge of it;
not by a dead one, for another reason. – For a philosopher to see a problem in the
value of life thus even constitutes an objection to him, a question-mark as to his
wisdom, a piece of unwisdom. – What? and all these great wise men – they have
not only been décadents, they have not even been wise? – But I shall get back to the
problem of Socrates.

3

Socrates belonged, in his origins, to the lowest orders: Socrates was rabble. One
knows, one sees for oneself, how ugly he was. But ugliness, an objection in itself, is
among Greeks almost a refutation. Was Socrates a Greek at all? Ugliness is
frequently enough the sign of a thwarted development, a development retarded by
interbreeding. Otherwise it appears as a development in decline. Anthropologists
among criminologists tell us the typical criminal is ugly: monstrum in fronte,
monstrum in animo.† But the criminal is a décadent. Was Socrates a typical
criminal? – At least that famous physiognomist’s opinion which Socrates’ friends
found so objectionable would not contradict this idea. A foreigner passing through
Athens who knew how to read faces told Socrates to his face that he was a
monstrum – that he contained within him every kind of foul vice and lust. And
Socrates answered merely: ‘You know me, sir!’ –

4
It is not only the admitted dissoluteness and anarchy of his instincts which indicate
décadence in Socrates: the superfetation of the logical and that barbed malice which
distinguishes him also point in that direction. And let us not forget those auditory
hallucinations which, as ‘Socrates’ demon’, have been interpreted in a religious
sense. Everything about him is exaggerated, buffo, caricature, everything is at the
same time hidden, reserved, subterranean. – I seek to understand out of what
idiosyncrasy that Socratic equation reason = virtue = happiness derives: that
bizarrest of equations and one which has in particular all the instincts of the older
Hellenes against it.

5
With Socrates Greek taste undergoes a change in favour of dialectics: what is really
happening when that happens? It is above all the defeat of a nobler taste; with
dialectics the rabble gets on top. Before Socrates, the dialectical manner was
repudiated in good society: it was regarded as a form of bad manners, one was
compromised by it. Young people were warned against it. And all such presentation
of one’s reasons was regarded with mistrust. Honest things, like honest men, do not
carry their reasons exposed in this fashion. It is indecent to display all one’s goods.
What has first to have itself proved is of little value. Wherever authority is still part
of accepted usage and one does not ‘give reasons’ but commands, the dialectician is
a kind of buffoon: he is laughed at, he is not taken seriously. – Socrates was the
buffoon who got himself taken seriously: what was really happening when that
happened?

6

One chooses dialectics only when one has no other expedient. One knows that
dialectics inspire mistrust, that they are not very convincing. Nothing is easier to
expunge than the effect of a dialectician, as is proved by the experience of every
speech-making assembly. Dialectics can be only a last-ditch weapon in the hands of
those who have no other weapon left. One must have to enforce one’s rights:
otherwise one makes no use of it. That is why the Jews were dialecticians; Reynard
the Fox was a dialectician: what? and Socrates was a dialectician too? –

7
– Is Socrates’ irony an expression of revolt? of the ressentiment of the rabble? does
he, as one of the oppressed, enjoy his own form of ferocity in the knife-thrust of the
syllogism? does he revenge himself on the aristocrats he fascinates? – As a
dialectician one is in possession of a pitiless instrument; with its aid one can play
the tyrant; one compromises by conquering. The dialectician leaves it to his
opponent to demonstrate he is not an idiot: he enrages, he at the same time makes
helpless. The dialectician devitalizes his opponent’s intellect. – What? is dialectics
only a form of revenge in the case of Socrates?

8
I have intimated the way in which Socrates could repel: it is therefore all the more
necessary to explain the fact that he exercised fascination. – That he discovered a
new kind of agon, that he was the first fencing-master in it for the aristocratic
circles of Athens, is one reason. He fascinated because he touched on the agonal
instinct of the Hellenes – he introduced a variation into the wrestling-matches
among the youths and young men. Socrates was also a great erotic.

9
But Socrates divined even more. He saw behind his aristocratic Athenians; he
grasped that his case, the idiosyncrasy of his case, was already no longer
exceptional. The same kind of degeneration was everywhere silently preparing
itself: the old Athens was coming to an end. – And Socrates understood that all the
world had need of him – his expedient, his cure, his personal art of selfpreservation.… Everywhere the instincts were in anarchy; everywhere people were
but five steps from excess: the monstrum in animo was the universal danger. ‘The
instincts want to play the tyrant; we must devise a counter-tyrant who is stronger’.
… When that physiognomist had revealed to Socrates what he was, a cave of every
evil lust, the great ironist uttered a phrase that provides the key to him. ‘That is
true,’ he said, ‘but I have become master of them all.’ How did Socrates become
master of himself? – His case was after all only the extreme case, only the most

obvious instance of what had at that time begun to be the universal exigency: that
no one was any longer master of himself, that the instincts were becoming mutually
antagonistic. He exercised fascination as this extreme case – his fear-inspiring
ugliness expressed it for every eye to see: he fascinated even more, it goes without
saying, as the answer, as the solution, as the apparent cure for this case. –

10
If one needs to make a tyrant of reason, as Socrates did, then there must exist no
little danger of something else playing the tyrant. Rationality was at that time
divined as a saviour; neither Socrates nor his ‘invalids’ were free to be rational or
not, as they wished – it was de rigueur, it was their last expedient. The fanaticism
with which the whole of Greek thought throws itself at rationality betrays a state of
emergency: one was in peril, one had only one choice: either to perish or – be
absurdly rational.… The moralism of the Greek philosophers from Plato
downwards is pathologically conditioned: likewise their estimation of dialectics.
Reason = virtue = happiness means merely: one must imitate Socrates and counter
the dark desires by producing a permanent daylight – the daylight of reason. One
must be prudent, clear, bright at any cost: every yielding to the instincts, to the
unconscious, leads downwards…

11
I have intimated the way in which Socrates exercised fascination: he seemed to be a
physician, a saviour. Is it necessary to go on to point out the error which lay in his
faith in ‘rationality at any cost’? – It is self-deception on the part of philosophers
and moralists to imagine that by making war on décadence they therewith elude
décadence themselves. This is beyond their powers: what they select as an
expedient, as a deliverance, is itself only another expression of décadence – they
alter its expression, they do not abolish the thing itself. Socrates was a
misunderstanding: the entire morality of improvement, the Christian included, has
been a misunderstanding.… The harshest daylight, rationality at any cost, life
bright, cold, circumspect, conscious, without instinct, in opposition to the instincts,
has itself been no more than a form of sickness, another form of sickness – and by
no means a way back to ‘virtue’, to ‘health’, to happiness…. To have to combat
one’s instincts – that is the formula for décadence: as long as life is ascending,
happiness and instinct are one. –

12
– Did he himself grasp that, this shrewdest of all self-deceivers? Did he at last say
that to himself in the wisdom of his courage for death?… Socrates wanted to die – it

was not Athens, it was he who handed himself the poison cup, who compelled
Athens to hand him the poison cup.… ‘Socrates is no physician,’ he said softly to
himself: ‘death alone is a physician here.… Socrates himself has only been a long
time sick…’

‘Reason’ in Philosophy
1
You ask me about the idiosyncrasies of philosophers?… There is their lack of
historical sense, their hatred of even the idea of becoming, their Egyptianism. They
think they are doing a thing honour when they dehistoricize it, sub specie aeterni* –
when they make a mummy of it. All that philosophers have handled for millennia
has been conceptual mummies; nothing actual has escaped from their hands alive.
They kill, they stuff, when they worship, these conceptual idolaters – they become a
mortal danger to everything when they worship. Death, change, age, as well as
procreation and growth, are for them objections – refutations even. What is, does
not become; what becomes, is not.… Now they all believe, even to the point of
despair, in that which is. But since they cannot get hold of it, they look for reasons
why it is being withheld from them. ‘It must be an illusion, a deception which
prevents us from perceiving that which is: where is the deceiver to be found?’ –
‘We’ve got it,’ they cry in delight, ‘it is the senses! These senses, which are so
immoral as well, it is they which deceive us about the real world. Moral: escape
from sense-deception, from becoming, from history, from falsehood – history is
nothing but belief in the senses, belief in falsehood. Moral: denial of all that
believes in the senses, of all the rest of mankind: all of that is mere “people”. Be a
philosopher, be a mummy, represent monotono-theism by a gravedigger-mimicry! –
And away, above all, with the body, that pitiable idée fixe of the senses! infected
with every error of logic there is, refuted, impossible even, notwithstanding it is
impudent enough to behave as if it actually existed!’…

2
I set apart with high reverence the name of Heraclitus. When the rest of the
philosopher crowd rejected the evidence of the senses because these showed
plurality and change, he rejected their evidence because they showed things as if
they possessed duration and unity. Heraclitus too was unjust to the senses, which lie
neither in the way the Eleatics* believe nor as he believed – they do not lie at all. It
is what we make of their evidence that first introduces a lie into it, for example the
lie of unity, the lie of materiality, of substance, of duration.… ‘Reason’ is the cause
of our falsification of the evidence of the senses. In so far as the senses show
becoming, passing away, change, they do not lie.… But Heraclitus will always be
right in this, that being is an empty fiction. The ‘apparent’ world is the only one: the
‘real’ world has only been lyingly added…

3
– And what subtle instruments for observation we possess in our senses! This nose,
for example, of which no philosopher has hitherto spoken with respect and
gratitude, is none the less the most delicate tool we have at our command: it can
detect minimal differences in movement which even the spectroscope cannot detect.
We possess scientific knowledge today to precisely the extent that we have decided
to accept the evidence of the senses – to the extent that we have learned to sharpen
and arm them and to think them through to their conclusions. The rest is abortion
and not-yet-science: which is to say metaphysics, theology, psychology,
epistemology. Or science of formulae, sign-systems: such as logic and that applied
logic, mathematics. In these reality does not appear at all, not even as a problem;
just as little as does the question what value a system of conventional signs such as
constitutes logic can possibly possess.

4
The other idiosyncrasy of philosophers is no less perilous: it consists in mistaking
the last for the first. They put that which comes at the end – unfortunately! for it
ought not to come at all! – the ‘highest concepts’, that is to say the most general,
the emptiest concepts, the last fumes of evaporating reality, at the beginning as the
beginning. It is again only the expression of their way of doing reverence: the
higher must not be allowed to grow out of the lower, must not be allowed to have
grown at all.… Moral: everything of the first rank must be causa sui. * Origin in
something else counts as an objection, as casting a doubt on value. All supreme
values are of the first rank, all the supreme concepts – that which is, the
unconditioned, the good, the true, the perfect – all that cannot have become, must
therefore be causa sui. But neither can these supreme concepts be incommensurate
with one another, be incompatible with one another.… Thus they acquired their
stupendous concept ‘God’.… The last, thinnest, emptiest is placed as the first, as
cause in itself, as ens realissimum.†…That mankind should have taken seriously the
brain-sick fancies of morbid cobweb-spinners! – And it has paid dearly for doing
so!…

5
– Let us, in conclusion, set against this the very different way in which we (– I say
‘we’ out of politeness…) view the problem of error and appearance. Change,
mutation, becoming in general were formerly taken as proof of appearance, as a
sign of the presence of something which led us astray. Today, on the contrary, we
see ourselves as it were entangled in error, necessitated to error, to precisely the

extent that our prejudice in favour of reason compels us to posit unity, identity,
duration, substance, cause, materiality, being; however sure we may be, on the basis
of a strict reckoning, that error is to be found here. The situation is the same as with
the motions of the sun: in that case error has our eyes, in the present case our
language as a perpetual advocate. Language belongs in its origin to the age of the
most rudimentary form of psychology: we find ourselves in the midst of a rude
fetishism when we call to mind the basic presuppositions of the metaphysics of
language – which is to say, of reason. It is this which sees everywhere deed and
doer; this which believes in will as cause in general; this which believes in the
‘ego’, in the ego as being, in the ego as substance, and which projects its belief in
the ego-substance on to all things – only thus does it create the concept ‘thing’.…
Being is everywhere thought in, foisted on, as cause; it is only from the conception
‘ego’ that there follows, derivatively, the concept ‘being’.… At the beginning
stands the great fateful error that the will is something which produces an effect –
that will is a faculty.… Today we know it is merely a word.… Very much later, in a
world a thousand times more enlightened, the security, the subjective certainty with
which the categories of reason* could be employed came all of a sudden into
philosophers’ heads: they concluded that these could not have originated in the
empirical world – indeed, the entire empirical world was incompatible with them.
Where then do they originate? – And in India as in Greece they committed the same
blunder: ‘We must once have dwelt in a higher world’ – instead of in a very much
lower one, which would have been the truth! – ‘we must have been divine, for we
possess reason!’… Nothing, in fact, has hitherto had a more direct power of
persuasion than the error of being as it was formulated by, for example, the
Eleatics: for every word, every sentence we utter speaks in its favour! – Even the
opponents of the Eleatics were still subject to the seductive influence of their
concept of being: Democritus, among others, when he invented his atom.…
‘Reason’ in language: oh what a deceitful old woman! I fear we are not getting rid
of God because we still believe in grammar…

6
It will be a matter for gratitude if I now compress so fundamental and new an
insight into four theses: I shall thereby make it easier to understand, I shall thereby
challenge contradiction.
First proposition. The grounds upon which ‘this’ world has been designated as
apparent establish rather its reality – another kind of reality is absolutely
undemonstrable.
Second proposition. The characteristics which have been assigned to the ‘real
being’ of things are the characteristics of non-being, of nothingness – the ‘real

world’ has been constructed out of the contradiction to the actual world: an apparent
world indeed, in so far as it is no more than a moral-optical illusion.
Third proposition. To talk about ‘another’ world than this is quite pointless,
provided that an instinct for slandering, disparaging and accusing life is not strong
within us: in the latter case we revenge ourselves on life by means of the
phantasmagoria of ‘another’, a ‘better’ life.
Fourth proposition. To divide the world into a ‘real’ and an ‘apparent’ world,
whether in the manner of Christianity or in the manner of Kant (which is, after all,
that of a cunning Christian –) is only a suggestion of décadence – a symptom of
declining life.… That the artist places a higher value on appearance than on reality
constitutes no objection to this proposition. For ‘appearance’ here signifies reality
once more, only selected, strengthened, corrected.… The tragic artist is not a
pessimist – it is precisely he who affirms all that is questionable and terrible in
existence, he is Dionysian…

How the ‘Real World’ at last Became a Myth
HISTORY OF AN ERROR
1. The real world, attainable to the wise, the pious, the virtuous man – he dwells in
it, he is it.
(Oldest form of the idea, relatively sensible, simple, convincing.
Transcription of the proposition ‘I, Plato, am the truth.’)*
2. The real world, unattainable for the moment, but promised to the wise, the pious,
the virtuous man (‘to the sinner who repents’).
(Progress of the idea: it grows more refined, more enticing, more
incomprehensible – it becomes a woman, it becomes Christian…)
3. The real world, unattainable, undemonstrable, cannot be promised, but even
when merely thought of a consolation, a duty, an imperative.
(Fundamentally the same old sun, but shining through mist and scepticism;
the idea grown sublime, pale, northerly, Königsbergian.)†
4. The real world – unattainable? Unattained, at any rate. And if unattained also
unknown. Consequently also no consolation, no redemption, no duty: how could we
have a duty towards something unknown?
(The grey of dawn. First yawnings of reason. Cockcrow of positivism.)‡
5. The ‘real world’ – an idea no longer of any use, not even a duty any longer – an
idea grown useless, superfluous, consequently a refuted idea: let us abolish it!
(Broad daylight; breakfast; return of cheerfulness and bons sens; Plato
blushes for shame; all free spirits run riot.)
6. We have abolished the real world: what world is left? the apparent world
perhaps?… But no! with the real world we have also abolished the apparent world!
(Mid-day; moment of the shortest shadow; end of the longest error; zenith of
mankind; INCIPIT ZARATHUSTRA)*

Morality as Anti-Nature
1
There is a time with all passions when they are merely fatalities, when they drag
their victim down with the weight of their folly – and a later, very much later time
when they are wedded with the spirit, when they are ‘spiritualized’. Formerly one
made war on passion itself on account of the folly inherent in it: one conspired for
its extermination – all the old moral monsters are unanimous that ‘il faut tuer les
passions’.* The most famous formula for doing this is contained in the New
Testament, in the Sermon on the Mount, where, by the way, things are not at all
regarded from a lofty standpoint. There, for example, it is said, with reference to
sexuality, ‘if thy eye offend thee, pluck it out’: fortunately no Christian follows this
prescription. To exterminate the passions and desires merely in order to do away
with their folly and its unpleasant consequences – this itself seems to us today
merely an acute form of folly. We no longer admire dentists who pull out the teeth
to stop them hurting.… On the other hand, it is only fair to admit that on the soil
out of which Christianity grew the concept ‘spiritualization of passion’ could not
possibly be conceived. For the primitive Church, as is well known, fought against
the ‘intelligent’ in favour of the ‘poor in spirit’: how could one expect from it an
intelligent war against passion? – The Church combats the passions with excision in
every sense of the word: its practice, its ‘cure’ is castration. It never asks: ‘How can
one spiritualize, beautify, deify a desire?’ – it has at all times laid the emphasis of
its discipline on extirpation (of sensuality, of pride, of lust for power, of avarice, of
revengefulness). – But to attack the passions at their roots means to attack life at its
roots: the practice of the Church is hostile to life…

2
The same expedient – castration, extirpation – is instinctively selected in a struggle
against a desire by those who are too weak-willed, too degenerate to impose
moderation upon it: by those natures which need La Trappe,* to speak
metaphorically (and not metaphorically –), some sort of definitive declaration of
hostility, a chasm between themselves and a passion. It is only the degenerate who
cannot do without radical expedients; weakness of will, more precisely the inability
not to react to a stimulus, is itself merely another form of degeneration. Radical
hostility, mortal hostility towards sensuality is always a thought-provoking
symptom: it justifies making certain conjectures as to the general condition of one
who is excessive in this respect. – That hostility, that hatred reaches its height,
moreover, only when such natures are no longer sufficiently sound even for the

radical cure, for the renunciation of their ‘devil’. Survey the entire history of priests
and philosophers, and that of artists as well: the most virulent utterances against the
senses have not come from the impotent, nor from ascetics, but from those who
found it impossible to be ascetics, from those who stood in need of being ascetics…

3
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a great triumph over
Christianity. A further triumph is our spiritualization of enmity. It consists in
profoundly grasping the value of having enemies: in brief, in acting and thinking in
the reverse of the way in which one formerly acted and thought. The Church has at
all times desired the destruction of its enemies: we, we immoralists and antiChristians, see that it is to our advantage that the Church exist.… In politics, too,
enmity has become much more spiritual – much more prudent, much more
thoughtful, much more forbearing. Almost every party grasps that it is in the
interest of its own self-preservation that the opposing party should not decay in
strength; the same is true of grand politics. A new creation in particular, the new
Reich for instance, has more need of enemies than friends: only in opposition does
it feel itself necessary, only in opposition does it become necessary.… We adopt the
same attitude towards the ‘enemy within’: there too we have spiritualized enmity,
there too we have grasped its value. One is fruitful only at the cost of being rich in
contradictions; one remains young only on condition the soul does not relax, does
not long for peace.… Nothing has grown more alien to us than that desideratum of
former times ‘peace of soul’, the Christian desideratum; nothing arouses less envy
in us than the moral cow and the fat contentment of the good conscience.… One has
renounced grand life when one renounces war.… In many cases, to be sure, ‘peace
of soul’ is merely a misunderstanding – something else that simply does not know
how to give itself a more honest name. Here, briefly and without prejudice, are a
few of them. ‘Peace of soul’ can, for example, be the gentle radiation of a rich
animality into the moral (or religious) domain. Or the beginning of weariness, the
first of the shadows which evening, every sort of evening, casts. Or a sign that the
air is damp, that south winds are on the way. Or unconscious gratitude for a good
digestion (sometimes called ‘philanthropy’). Or the quiescence of the convalescent
for whom all things have a new taste and who waits.… Or the condition which
succeeds a vigorous gratification of our ruling passion, the pleasant feeling of a rare
satiety. Or the decrepitude of our will, our desires, our vices. Or laziness persuaded
by vanity to deck itself out as morality. Or the appearance of a certainty, even a
dreadful certainty, after the protracted tension and torture of uncertainty. Or the
expression of ripeness and mastery in the midst of action, creation, endeavour,
volition, a quiet breathing, ‘freedom of will’ attained.… Twilight of the Idols: who

knows? perhaps that too is only a kind of ‘peace of soul’…

4
– I formulate a principle. All naturalism in morality, that is all healthy morality, is
dominated by an instinct of life – some commandment of life is fulfilled through a
certain canon of ‘shall’ and ‘shall not’, some hindrance and hostile element on life’s
road is thereby removed. Anti-natural morality, that is virtually every morality that
has hitherto been taught, reverenced and preached, turns on the contrary precisely
against the instincts of life – it is a now secret, now loud and impudent
condemnation of these instincts. By saying ‘God sees into the heart’ it denies the
deepest and the highest desires of life and takes God for the enemy of life.… The
saint in whom God takes pleasure is the ideal castrate.… Life is at an end where the
‘kingdom of God’ begins…

5
If one has grasped the blasphemousness of such a rebellion against life as has, in
Christian morality, become virtually sacrosanct, one has fortunately therewith
grasped something else as well: the uselessness, illusoriness, absurdity, falsity of
such a rebellion. For a condemnation of life by the living is after all no more than
the symptom of a certain kind of life: the question whether the condemnation is just
or unjust has not been raised at all. One would have to be situated outside life, and
on the other hand to know it as thoroughly as any, as many, as all who have
experienced it, to be permitted to touch on the problem of the value of life at all:
sufficient reason for understanding that this problem is for us an inaccessible
problem. When we speak of values we do so under the inspiration and from the
perspective of life: life itself evaluates through us when we establish values.… From
this it follows that even that anti-nature of a morality which conceives God as the
contrary concept to and condemnation of life is only a value judgement on the part
of life – of what life? of what kind of life? – But I have already given the answer: of
declining, debilitated, weary, condemned life. Morality as it has been understood
hitherto – as it was ultimately formulated by Schopenhauer as ‘denial of the will to
life’ – is the instinct of décadence itself, which makes out of itself an imperative: it
says: ‘Perish!’ – it is the judgement of the judged…

6
Let us consider finally what naïvety it is to say ‘man ought to be thus and thus!’
Reality shows us an enchanting wealth of types, the luxuriance of a prodigal play
and change of forms: and does some pitiful journeyman moralist say at the sight of
it: ‘No! man ought to be different’?… He even knows how man ought to be, this

bigoted wretch; he paints himself on the wall and says ‘ecce homo’!*… But even
when the moralist merely turns to the individual and says to him: ‘You ought to be
thus and thus’ he does not cease to make himself ridiculous. The individual is, in
his future and in his past, a piece of fate, one law more, one necessity more for
everything that is and everything that will be. To say to him ‘change yourself’
means to demand that everything should change, even in the past.… And there have
indeed been consistent moralists who wanted man to be different, namely virtuous,
who wanted him in their own likeness, namely that of a bigot: to that end they
denied the world! No mean madness! No modest presumption!… In so far as
morality condemns as morality and not with regard to the aims and objects of life, it
is a specific error with which one should show no sympathy, an idiosyncrasy of the
degenerate which has caused an unspeakable amount of harm!… We others, we
immoralists, have on the contrary opened wide our hearts to every kind of
understanding, comprehension, approval. We do not readily deny, we seek our
honour in affirming. We have come more and more to appreciate that economy
which needs and knows how to use all that which the holy lunacy of the priest, the
diseased reason of the priest rejects; that economy in the law of life which derives
advantage even from the repellent species of the bigot, the priest, the virtuous man
– what advantage? – But we ourselves, we immoralists, are the answer to that…

The Four Great Errors
1
The error of confusing cause and consequence. – There is no more dangerous error
than that of mistaking the consequence for the cause: I call it reason’s intrinsic form
of corruption. None the less, this error is among the most ancient and most recent
habits of mankind: it is even sanctified among us, it bears the names ‘religion’ and
‘morality’. Every proposition formulated by religion and morality contains it; priests
and moral legislators are the authors of this corruption of reason. – I adduce an
example. Everyone knows the book of the celebrated Cornaro in which he
recommends his meagre diet as a recipe for a long and happy life – a virtuous one,
too. Few books have been so widely read; even now many thousands of copies are
printed in England every year. I do not doubt that hardly any book (the Bible rightly
excepted) has done so much harm, has shortened so many lives, as this curiosity,
which was so well meant. The reason: mistaking the consequence for the cause. The
worthy Italian saw in his diet the cause of his long life: while the prerequisite of
long life, an extraordinarily slow metabolism, a small consumption, was the cause
of his meagre diet. He was not free to eat much or little as he chose, his frugality
was not an act of ‘free will’: he became ill when he ate more. But if one is not a
bony fellow of this sort one does not merely do well, one positively needs to eat
properly. A scholar of our day, with his rapid consumption of nervous energy,
would kill himself with Cornaro’s regimen. Credo experto. –

2
The most general formula at the basis of every religion and morality is: ‘Do this and
this, refrain from this and this – and you will be happy! Otherwise.…’ Every
morality, every religion is this imperative – I call it the great original sin of reason,
immortal unreason. In my mouth this formula is converted into its reverse – first
example of my ‘revaluation of all values’: a well-constituted human being, a ‘happy
one’, must perform certain actions and instinctively shrinks from other actions, he
transports the order of which he is the physiological representative into his relations
with other human beings and with things. In a formula: his virtue is the
consequence of his happiness.… Long life, a plentiful posterity is not the reward of
virtue, virtue itself is rather just that slowing down of the metabolism which also
has, among other things, a long life, a plentiful posterity, in short Cornarism, as its
outcome. – The Church and morality say: ‘A race, a people perishes through vice
and luxury’. My restored reason says: when a people is perishing, degenerating
physiologically, vice and luxury (that is to say the necessity for stronger and

stronger and more and more frequent stimulants, such as every exhausted nature is
acquainted with) follow therefrom. A young man grows prematurely pale and faded.
His friends say: this and that illness is to blame. I say: that he became ill, that he
failed to resist the illness, was already the consequence of an impoverished life, an
hereditary exhaustion. The newspaper reader says: this party will ruin itself if it
makes errors like this. My higher politics says: a party which makes errors like this
is already finished – it is no longer secure in its instincts. Every error, of whatever
kind, is a consequence of degeneration of instinct, disgregation of will: one has
thereby virtually defined the bad. Everything good is instinct – and consequently
easy, necessary, free. Effort is an objection, the god is typically distinguished from
the hero (in my language: light feet are the first attribute of divinity).

3
The error of a false causality. – We have always believed we know what a cause is:
but whence did we derive our knowledge, more precisely our belief we possessed
this knowledge? From the realm of the celebrated ‘inner facts’, none of which has
up till now been shown to be factual. We believed ourselves to be causal agents in
the act of willing; we at least thought we were there catching causality in the act. It
was likewise never doubted that all the antecedentia of an action, its causes, were to
be sought in the consciousness and could be discovered there if one sought them –
as ‘motives’: for otherwise one would not have been free to perform it, responsible
for it. Finally, who would have disputed that a thought is caused? that the ego
causes the thought?… Of these three ‘inner facts’ through which causality seemed
to be guaranteed the first and most convincing was that of will as cause; the
conception of a consciousness (‘mind’) as cause and later still that of the ego (the
‘subject’) as cause are merely after-products after causality had, on the basis of will,
been firmly established as a given fact, as empiricism.… Meanwhile, we have
thought better. Today we do not believe a word of it. The ‘inner world’ is full of
phantoms and false lights: the will is one of them. The will no longer moves
anything, consequently no longer explains anything – it merely accompanies events,
it can also be absent. The so-called ‘motive’: another error. Merely a surface
phenomenon of consciousness, an accompaniment to an act, which conceals rather
than exposes the antecedentia of the act. And as for the ego! It has become a fable,
a fiction, a play on words: it has totally ceased to think, to feel and to will!… What
follows from this? There are no spiritual causes at all! The whole of the alleged
empiricism which affirmed them has gone to the devil! That is what follows! – And
we had made a nice misuse of that ‘empiricism’, we had created the world on the
basis of it as a world of causes, as a world of will, as a world of spirit. The oldest
and longest-lived psychology was at work here – indeed it has done nothing else:

every event was to it an action, every action the effect of a will, the world became
for it a multiplicity of agents, an agent (‘subject’) foisted itself upon every event.
Man projected his three ‘inner facts’, that in which he believed more firmly than in
anything else, will, spirit, ego, outside himself – he derived the concept ‘being’ only
from the concept ‘ego’, he posited ‘things’ as possessing being according to his own
image, according to his concept of the ego as cause. No wonder he later always
discovered in things only that which he had put into them! –The thing itself, to say
it again, the concept ‘thing’ is merely a reflection of the belief in the ego as cause.
… And even your atom, messieurs mechanists and physicists, how much error, how
much rudimentary psychology, still remains in your atom! – To say nothing of the
‘thing in itself’,* that horrendum pudendum† of the metaphysicians! The error of
spirit as cause mistaken for reality! And made the measure of reality! And called
God! –

4
The error of imaginary causes. – To start from the dream: on to a certain sensation,
the result for example of a distant cannon-shot, a cause is subsequently foisted
(often a whole little novel in which precisely the dreamer is the chief character).
The sensation, meanwhile, continues to persist, as a kind of resonance: it waits, as it
were, until the cause-creating drive permits it to step into the foreground – now no
longer as a chance occurrence but as ‘meaning’. The cannon-shot enters in a causal
way, in an apparent inversion of time. That which comes later, the motivation, is
experienced first, often with a hundred details which pass like lightning, the shot
follows.… What has happened? The ideas engendered by a certain condition have
been misunderstood as the cause of that condition. – We do just the same thing, in
fact, when we are awake. Most of our general feelings – every sort of restraint,
pressure, tension, explosion in the play and counter-play of our organs, likewise and
especially the condition of the nervus sympathicus – excite our cause-creating drive:
we want to have a reason for feeling as we do – for feeling well or for feeling ill. It
never suffices us simply to establish the mere fact that we feel as we do: we
acknowledge this fact – become conscious of it – only when we have furnished it
with a motivation of some kind. – The memory, which in such a case becomes
active without our being aware of it, calls up earlier states of a similar kind and the
causal interpretations which have grown out of them – not their causality. To be
sure, the belief that these ideas, the accompanying occurrences in the consciousness,
were causes is also brought up by the memory. Thus there arises an habituation to a
certain causal interpretation which in truth obstructs and even prohibits an
investigation of the cause.

5

Psychological explanation. – To trace something unknown back to something
known is alleviating, soothing, gratifying and gives moreover a feeling of power.
Danger, disquiet, anxiety attend the unknown – the first instinct is to eliminate these
distressing states. First principle: any explanation is better than none. Because it is
at bottom only a question of wanting to get rid of oppressive ideas, one is not
exactly particular about what means one uses to get rid of them: the first idea which
explains that the unknown is in fact the known does so much good that one ‘holds it
for true’. Proof by pleasure (‘by potency’) as criterion of truth. – The cause-creating
drive is thus conditioned and excited by the feeling of fear. The question ‘why?’
should furnish, if at all possible, not so much the cause for its own sake as a certain
kind of cause – a soothing, liberating, alleviating cause. That something already
known, experienced, inscribed in the memory is posited as cause is the first
consequence of this need. The new, the unexperienced, the strange is excluded from
being cause. – Thus there is sought not only some kind of explanation as cause, but
a selected and preferred kind of explanation, the kind by means of which the feeling
of the strange, new, unexperienced is most speedily and most frequently abolished –
the most common explanations. – Consequence: a particular kind of cause-ascription
comes to preponderate more and more, becomes concentrated into a system and
finally comes to dominate over the rest, that is to say simply to exclude other causes
and explanations. – The banker thinks at once of ‘business’, the Christian of ‘sin’,
the girl of her love.

6
The entire realm of morality and religion falls under this concept of imaginary
causes. – ‘Explanation’ of unpleasant general feelings. They arise from beings
hostile to us (evil spirits: most celebrated case – hysterics misunderstood as
witches). They arise from actions we cannot approve of (the feeling of ‘sin’, of
‘culpability’ foisted upon a physiological discomfort – one always finds reasons for
being discontented with oneself). They arise as punishments, as payment for
something we should not have done, should not have been (generalized in an
impudent form by Schopenhauer into a proposition in which morality appears for
what it is, the actual poisoner and calumniator of life: ‘Every great pain, whether
physical or mental, declares what it is we deserve; for it could not have come upon
us if we had not deserved it.’ World as Will and Idea II 666). They arise as the
consequences of rash actions which have turned out badly (– the emotions, the
senses assigned as ‘cause’, as ‘to blame’; physiological states of distress construed,
with the aid of other states of distress, as ‘deserved’). – ‘Explanation’ of pleasant
general feelings. They arise from trust in God. They arise from the consciousness of
good actions (the so-called ‘good conscience’, a physiological condition sometimes

so like a sound digestion as to be mistaken for it). They arise from the successful
outcome of undertakings (– naïve fallacy: the successful outcome of an undertaking
certainly does not produce any pleasant general feelings in a hypochondriac or a
Pascal). They arise from faith, hope and charity – the Christian virtues. – In reality
all these supposed explanations are consequential states and as it were translations
of pleasurable and unpleasurable feelings into a false dialect: one is in a state in
which one can experience hope because the physiological basic feeling is once more
strong and ample; one trusts in God because the feeling of plenitude and strength
makes one calm. – Morality and religion fall entirely under the psychology of error:
in every single case cause is mistaken for effect; or the effect of what is believed
true is mistaken for the truth; or a state of consciousness is mistaken for the
causation of this state.

7
The error of free will. – We no longer have any sympathy today with the concept of
‘free will’: we know only too well what it is – the most infamous of all the arts of
the theologian for making mankind ‘accountable’ in his sense of the word, that is to
say for making mankind dependent on him.… I give here only the psychology of
making men accountable. – Everywhere accountability is sought, it is usually the
instinct for punishing and judging which seeks it. One has deprived becoming of its
innocence if being in this or that state is traced back to will, to intentions, to
accountable acts: the doctrine of will has been invented essentially for the purpose
of punishment, that is of finding guilty. The whole of the old-style psychology, the
psychology of will, has as its precondition the desire of its authors, the priests at the
head of the ancient communities, to create for themselves a right to ordain
punishments – or their desire to create for God a right to do so.… Men were
thought of as ‘free’ so that they could become guilty: consequently, every action
had to be thought of as willed, the origin of every action as lying in the
consciousness (– whereby the most fundamental falsification in psychologicis was
made into the very principle of psychology).… Today, when we have started to
move in the reverse direction, when we immoralists especially are trying with all
our might to remove the concept of guilt and the concept of punishment from the
world and to purge psychology, history, nature, the social institutions and sanctions
of them, there is in our eyes no more radical opposition than that of the theologians,
who continue to infect the innocence of becoming with ‘punishment’ and ‘guilt’ by
means of the concept of the ‘moral world-order’. Christianity is a hangman’s
metaphysics…

8

What alone can our teaching be? – That no one gives a human being his qualities:
not God, not society, not his parents or ancestors, not he himself (– the nonsensical
idea here last rejected was propounded, as ‘intelligible freedom’, by Kant, and
perhaps also by Plato before him). No one is accountable for existing at all, or for
being constituted as he is, or for living in the circumstances and surroundings in
which he lives. The fatality of his nature cannot be disentangled from the fatality of
all that which has been and will be. He is not the result of a special design, a will, a
purpose; he is not the subject of an attempt to attain to an ‘ideal of man’ or an ‘ideal
of happiness’ or an ‘ideal of morality’ – it is absurd to want to hand over his nature
to some purpose or other. We invented the concept ‘purpose’: in reality purpose is
lacking.… One is necessary, one is a piece of fate, one belongs to the whole, one is
in the whole – there exists nothing which could judge, measure, compare, condemn
our being, for that would be to judge, measure, compare, condemn the whole.… But
nothing exists apart from the whole! – That no one is any longer made accountable,
that the kind of being manifested cannot be traced back to a causa prima* that the
world is a unity neither as sensorium nor as ‘spirit’, this alone is the great liberation
– thus alone is the innocence of becoming restored.… The concept ‘God’ has
hitherto been the greatest objection to existence.… We deny God; in denying God,
we deny accountability: only by doing that do we redeem the world. –

The ‘Improvers’ of Mankind
1
One knows my demand of philosophers that they place themselves beyond good and
evil – that they have the illusion of moral judgement beneath them. This demand
follows from an insight first formulated by me: that there are no moral facts
whatever. Moral judgement has this in common with religious judgement that it
believes in realities which do not exist. Morality is only an interpretation of certain
phenomena, more precisely a misinterpretation. Moral judgement belongs, as does
religious judgement, to a level of ignorance at which even the concept of the real,
the distinction between the real and the imaginary, is lacking: so that at such a level
‘truth’ denotes nothing but things which we today call ‘imaginings’. To this extent
moral judgement is never to be taken literally: as such it never contains anything but
nonsense. But as semeiotics it remains of incalculable value: it reveals, to the
informed man at least, the most precious realities of cultures and inner worlds
which did not know enough to ‘understand’ themselves. Morality is merely signlanguage, merely symptomatology: one must already know what it is about to
derive profit from it.

2
A first example, merely as an introduction. In all ages one has wanted to ‘improve’
men: this above all is what morality has meant. But one word can conceal the most
divergent tendencies. Both the taming of the beast man and the breeding of a certain
species of man has been called ‘improvement’: only these zoological termini
express realities – realities, to be sure, of which the typical ‘improver’, the priest,
knows nothing – wants to know nothing.… To call the taming of an animal its
‘improvement’ is in our ears almost a joke. Whoever knows what goes on in
menageries is doubtful whether the beasts in them are ‘improved’. They are
weakened, they are made less harmful, they become sickly beasts through the
depressive emotion of fear, through pain, through injuries, through hunger. – It is
no different with the tamed human being whom the priest has ‘improved’. In the
early Middle Ages, when the Church was in fact above all a menagerie, one
everywhere hunted down the fairest specimens of the ‘blond beast’* – one
‘improved’, for example, the noble Teutons. But what did such a Teuton afterwards
look like when he had been ‘improved’ and led into a monastery? Like a caricature
of a human being, like an abortion: he had become a ‘sinner’, he was in a cage, one
had imprisoned him behind nothing but sheer terrifying concepts.… There he lay
now, sick, miserable, filled with ill-will towards himself; full of hatred for the

impulses towards life, full of suspicion of all that was still strong and happy. In
short, a ‘Christian’.… In physiological terms: in the struggle with the beast, making
it sick can be the only means of making it weak. This the Church understood: it
corrupted the human being, it weakened him – but it claimed to have ‘improved’
him…

3
Let us take the other aspect of so-called morality, the breeding of a definite race and
species. The most grandiose example of this is provided by Indian morality,
sanctioned, as the ‘Law of Manu’, into religion. Here the proposed task is to breed
no fewer than four races simultaneously: a priestly, a warrior, and a trading and
farming race, and finally a menial race, the Sudras. Here we are manifestly no
longer among animal-tamers: a species of human being a hundred times more gentle
and rational is presupposed even to conceive the plan of such a breeding. One draws
a breath of relief when coming out of the Christian sick-house and dungeon
atmosphere into this healthier, higher, wider world. How paltry the ‘New
Testament’ is compared with Manu, how ill it smells! – But this organization too
needed to be dreadful – this time in struggle not with the beast but with its
antithesis, with the non-bred human being, the hotchpotch human being, the
Chandala.* And again it had no means of making him weak and harmless other than
making him sick – it was the struggle with the ‘great majority’. Perhaps there is
nothing which outrages our feelings more than these protective measures of Indian
morality. The third edict, for example (Avadana-Shastra I), that ‘concerning
unclean vegetables’, ordains that the only nourishment permitted the Chandala shall
be garlic and onions, in view of the fact that holy scripture forbids one to give them
corn or seed-bearing fruits or water or fire. The same edict lays it down that the
water they need must not be taken from rivers or springs or pools, but only from the
entrances to swamps and holes made by the feet of animals. They are likewise
forbidden to wash their clothes or to wash themselves, since the water allowed them
as an act of charity must be used only for quenching the thirst. Finally, the Sudra
women are forbidden to assist the Chandala women in childbirth, and the latter are
likewise forbidden to assist one another.… – The harvest of such hygienic
regulations did not fail to appear: murderous epidemics, hideous venereal diseases
and, as a consequence, ‘the law of the knife’ once more, ordaining circumcision for
the male and removal of the labia minora for the female children. – Manu himself
says: ‘The Chandala are the fruit of adultery, incest and crime’ (– this being the
necessary consequence of the concept ‘breeding’). ‘They shall have for clothing
only rags from corpses, for utensils broken pots, for ornaments old iron, for worship
only evil spirits; they shall wander from place to place without rest. They are

forbidden to write from left to right and to use the right hand for writing: the
employment of the right hand and of the left-to-right motion is reserved for the
virtuous, for people of race.’ –

4
These regulations are instructive enough: in them we find for once Aryan humanity,
quite pure, quite primordial – we learn that the concept ‘pure blood’ is the opposite
of a harmless concept. It becomes clear, on the other hand, in which people the
hatred, the Chandala hatred for this ‘humanity’ has been immortalized, where it has
become religion, where it has become genius.… From this point of view, the
Gospels are documents of the first rank; the Book of Enoch even more so. –
Christianity, growing from Jewish roots and comprehensible only as a product of
this soil,* represents the reaction against that morality of breeding, of race, of
privilege – it is the anti-Aryan religion par excellence: Christianity the revaluation
of all Aryan values, the victory of Chandala values, the evangel preached to the
poor and lowly, the collective rebellion of everything downtrodden, wretched, illconstituted, under-privileged against the ‘race’ – undying Chandala revenge as the
religion of love…

5
The morality of breeding and the morality of taming are, in the means they employ
to attain their ends, entirely worthy of one another: we may set down as our chief
proposition that to make morality one must have the unconditional will to the
contrary. This is the great, the uncanny problem which I have pursued furthest: the
psychology of the ‘improvers’ of mankind. A small and really rather modest fact,
that of so-called pia fraus,† gave me my first access to this problem: pia fraus, the
heritage of all philosophers and priests who have ‘improved’ mankind. Neither
Manu nor Plato, neither Confucius nor the Jewish and Christian teachers, ever
doubted their right to tell lies. Nor did they doubt their possession of other rights.…
Expressed in a formula one might say: every means hitherto employed with the
intention of making mankind moral has been thoroughly immoral. –

What the Germans Lack
1
Among Germans today it is not enough to possess spirit: one must also possess the
presumption to possess it…
Perhaps I know the Germans, perhaps I might even venture to address a few
words to them. The new Germany represents a great quantity of inherited and
inculcated ability, so that it may for a time be allowed even a lavish expenditure of
its accumulated store of energy. It is not a high culture that has here gained
ascendancy, even less a fastidious taste, a noble ‘beauty’ of the instincts, but more
manly virtues than any other country of Europe can exhibit. A good deal of courage
and respect for oneself, a good deal of self-confidence in social dealings and in the
performance of reciprocal duties, a good deal of industriousness, a good deal of
endurance – and an inherited moderation which requires the goad rather than the
brake. I also add that here people can still obey without being humiliated by
obeying.… And no one despises his adversary…
You will see I want to be just to the Germans: I would not like to be untrue to
myself in this – so I must also tell them what I object to. Coming to power is a
costly business: power makes stupid.… The Germans – once they were called the
nation of thinkers: do they still think at all? Nowadays the Germans are bored with
intellect, the Germans mistrust intellect, politics devours all seriousness for really
intellectual things – Deutschland, Deutschland über alies was, I fear, the end of
German philosophy.… ‘Are there any German philosophers? are there any German
poets? are there any good German books?’ – people ask me abroad. I blush; but
with the courage which is mine even in desperate cases I answer: ‘Yes, Bismarck!’
– Dare I go so far as to confess which books are read nowadays?… Confounded
instinct of mediocrity! –

2
– Who has not pondered sadly over what the German spirit could be! But this nation
has deliberately made itself stupid, for practically a thousand years: nowhere else
are the two great European narcotics, alcohol and Christianity, so viciously abused.
Lately even a third has been added, one which is capable by itself of completely
obstructing all delicate and audacious flexibility of spirit: music, our constipated,
constipating German music. – How much dreary heaviness, lameness, dampness,
sloppiness, how much beer there is in the German intellect! How can it possibly
happen that young men who dedicate their existence to the most spiritual goals lack

all sense of the first instinct of spirituality, the spirit’s instinct for self-preservation
– and drink beer?… The alcoholism of scholarly youth perhaps does not constitute a
question mark in regard to their erudition – one can be even a great scholar without
possessing any spirit at all – but from any other point of view it remains a problem.
– Where does one not find that bland degeneration which beer produces in the
spirit! Once, in a case that has become almost famous, I laid my finger on such an
instance of degeneration – the degeneration of our first German freethinker, the
shrewd David Strauss, into the author of an alehouse gospel and a ‘new faith’.… It
was no vain vow he made in verse to the ‘gracious brunette’* – fidelity unto
death…

3
– I have said of the German spirit that it is growing coarser, that it is growing
shallow. Is that sufficient? – Fundamentally, it is something quite different which
appals me: how German seriousness, German profundity, German passion in
spiritual things is more and more on the decline. It is the pathos and not merely the
intellectual aspect which has altered. – I come in contact now and then with German
universities: what an atmosphere prevails among its scholars, what a barren
spirituality, grown how contented and lukewarm! It would be a profound
misunderstanding to adduce German science as an objection here, as well as being
proof one had not read a word I have written. For seventeen years I have not
wearied of exposing the despiritualizing influence of our contemporary scientific
pursuits. The harsh Helot condition to which the tremendous extent of science has
condemned every single person today is one of the main reasons why education and
educators appropriate to fuller, richer, deeper natures are no longer forthcoming.
Our culture suffers from nothing more than it suffers from the superabundance of
presumptuous journeymen and fragments of humanity; our universities are, against
their will, the actual forcing-houses for this kind of spiritual instinct-atrophy. And
all Europe already has an idea of this – grand politics deceives no one.… Germany
counts more and more as Europe’s flatland. – I am still looking for a German with
whom I could be serious after my fashion – how much more for one with whom I
might be cheerful! – Twilight of the Idols: ah, who today could grasp from how
profound a seriousness a hermit is here relaxing! – The most incomprehensible
thing about us is our cheerfulness…

4
If one makes a reckoning, it is obvious not only that German culture is declining,
the sufficient reason* for it is obvious too. After all, no one can spend more than he
has – that is true of individuals, it is also true of nations. If one spends oneself on

power, grand politics, economic affairs, world commerce, parliamentary
institutions, military interests – if one expends in this direction the quantum of
reason, seriousness, will, self-overcoming that one is, then there will be a shortage
in the other direction. Culture and the state – one should not deceive oneself over
this – are antagonists: the ‘cultural state’ is merely a modern idea. The one lives off
the other, the one thrives at the expense of the other. All great cultural epochs are
epochs of political decline: that which is great in the cultural sense has been
unpolitical, even anti-political.… Goethe’s heart opened up at the phenomenon
Napoleon – it closed up to the ‘Wars of Liberation’.… The moment Germany rises
as a great power, France gains a new importance as a cultural power. A great deal
of current spiritual seriousness and passion has already emigrated to Paris; the
question of pessimism, for instance, the Wagner question, virtually every
psychological and artistic question, is speculated on with incomparably more
subtlety and thoroughness there than in Germany – the Germans are even incapable
of this kind of seriousness. – In the history of European culture the rise of the
‘Reich’ signifies one thing above all: a displacement of the centre of gravity. The
fact is known everywhere: in the main thing – and that is still culture – the Germans
no longer come into consideration. The question is asked: haven’t you so much as
one spirit who means something to Europe? in the way your Goethe, your Hegel,
your Heinrich Heine, your Schopenhauer meant something? That there is no longer
a single German philosopher – there is no end of astonishment at that. –

5
The essential thing has gone out of the entire system of higher education in
Germany: the end, as well as the means to the end. That education, culture, itself is
the end – and not ‘the Reich’ – that educators are required for the attainment of this
end – and not grammar-school teachers and university scholars – that too has been
forgotten.… There is a need for educators who are themselves educated; superior,
noble spirits, who prove themselves every moment by what they say and by what
they do not say: cultures grown ripe and sweet – and not the learned boors which
grammar school and university offer youth today as ‘higher nurses’. Educators, the
first prerequisite of education, are lacking (except for the exceptions of exceptions):
hence the decline of German culture. – One of those rarest of exceptions is my
honoured friend Jacob Burckhardt of Basel: it is to him above all that Baselowes its
pre-eminence in the humanities. – What the ‘higher schools’ of Germany in fact
achieve is a brutal breaking-in with the aim of making, in the least possible time,
numberless young men fit to be utilized, utilized to the full and used up, in the state
service. ‘Higher education’ and numberless – that is a contradiction to start with.
All higher education belongs to the exceptions alone: one must be privileged to

have a right to so high a privilege. Great and fine things can never be common
property: pulchrum est paucorum hominum.* – What is the cause of the decline of
German culture? That ‘higher education’ is no longer a privilege – the democratism
of ‘culture’ made ‘universal’ and common.… Not to overlook the fact that military
privileges absolutely compel too great attendance at higher schools, which means
their ruin. – No one is any longer free in present-day Germany to give his children a
noble education: our ‘higher’ schools are one and all adjusted – as regards their
teachers, their curricula and their instructional aims – to the most dubious
mediocrity. And there reigns everywhere an indecent haste, as if something has
been neglected if the young man of twenty-three is not yet ‘finished and ready’,
does not yet know the answer to the ‘chief question’: which calling? – A higher
kind of human being, excuse me for saying, doesn’t think much of ‘callings’, the
reason being he knows himself called.… He takes his time, he has plenty of time,
he gives no thought whatsoever to being ‘finished and ready’ – at the age of thirty
one is, as regards high culture, a beginner, a child. – Our overcrowded grammar
schools, our overloaded, stupified grammar-school teachers, are a scandal: one may
perhaps have motives for defending this state of things, as the professors of
Heidelberg recently did – there are no grounds for doing so.

6
To be true to my nature, which is affirmative and has dealings with contradiction
and criticism only indirectly and when compelled, I shall straightaway set down the
three tasks for the sake of which one requires educators. One has to learn to see,
one has to learn to think, one has to learn to speak and write: the end in all three is a
noble culture. – Learning to see – habituating the eye to repose, to patience, to
letting things come to it; learning to defer judgement, to investigate and
comprehend the individual case in all its aspects. This is the first preliminary
schooling in spirituality: not to react immediately to a stimulus, but to have the
restraining, stock-taking instincts in one’s control. Learning to see, as I understand
it, is almost what is called in unphilo-sophical language ‘strong will-power’: the
essence of it is precisely not to ‘will’, the ability to defer decision. All unspirituality, all vulgarity, is due to the incapacity to resist a stimulus – one has to react,
one obeys every impulse. In many instances, such a compulsion is already
morbidity, decline, a symptom of exhaustion – almost everything which
unphilosophical crudity designates by the name ‘vice’ is merely this physiological
incapacity not to react – A practical application of having learned to see: one will
have become slow, mistrustful, resistant as a learner in general. In an attitude of
hostile calm one will allow the strange, the novel of every kind to approach one first
– one will draw one’s hand back from it. To stand with all doors open, to prostrate

oneself submissively before every petty fact, to be ever itching to mingle with,
plunge into other people and other things, in short our celebrated modern
‘objectivity’, is bad taste, is ignoble par excellence. –

7
Learning to think: our schools no longer have any idea what this means. Even in our
universities, even among students of philosophy themselves, the theory, the
practice, the vocation of logic is beginning to die out. Read German books: no
longer the remotest recollection that a technique, a plan of instruction, a will to
mastery is required for thinking – that thinking has to be learned in the way dancing
has to be learned, as a form of dancing.… Who among Germans still knows from
experience that subtle thrill which the possession of intellectual light feet
communicates to all the muscles! – A stiffly awkward air in intellectual matters, a
clumsy hand in grasping – this is in so great a degree German that foreigners take it
for the German nature in general. The German has no fingers for nuances.… That
the Germans have so much as endured their philosophers, above all that most
deformed conceptual cripple there has ever been, the great Kant, offers a good idea
of German amenableness. For dancing in any form cannot be divorced from a noble
education, being able to dance with the feet, with concepts, with words: do I still
have to say that one has to be able to dance with the pen – that writing has to be
learned? – But at this point I should become a complete enigma to German
readers…

Expeditions of an Untimely Man
1
My impossibles. – Seneca: or the toreador of virtue. – Rousseau: or the return to
nature in impuris naturalibus* – Schiller: or the Moral-Trumpeter of Säckingen.† –
Dante: or the hyena which poetises on graves. – Kant: or cant as intelligible
character. – Victor Hugo: or the Pharos in the Sea of Absurdity. – Liszt: or the
virtuoso – with women.‡ – George Sand: or lactea ubertas,§ in English: the milch
cow with the ‘fine style’. – Michelet: or enthusiasm which strips off the jacket. –
Carlyle: or pessimism as indigestion. – John Stuart Mill: or offensive clarity. – Les
frères de Goncourt: or the two Ajaxes struggling with Homer. Music by Offenbach.
Zola: or ‘delight in stinking’. –

2
Renan. – Theology, or the corruption of reason by ‘original sin’ (Christianity).
Witness: Renan, who, whenever he risks a more general Yes or No, misses the
point with painful regularity. He would like, for instance, to couple together la
science and la noblesse; but la science belongs to democracy, that is patently
obvious. He desires, with no little ambitiousness, to represent an aristocratism of the
intellect: but at the same time he falls on his knees, and not only his knees, before
its opposite, the évangile des humbles.… What avails all free thinking, modernity,
mockery and wry-necked flexibility, if one is still Christian, Catholic and even
priest in one’s bowels! Renan possesses his mode of inventiveness, just like a Jesuit
or a father confessor, in devising means of seduction; his intellectuality does not
lack the broad priestly smirk – like all priests, he becomes dangerous only when he
loves. Nobody can equal him in deadly adoration.… This spirit of Renan, an
enervating spirit, is one fatality more for poor, sick, feeble-willed France. –

3
Sainte-Beuve. – Nothing masculine in him; full of petty sullen wrath against all
masculine spirit. Roams about, delicate, inquisitive, bored, eavesdropping –
fundamentally a woman, with a woman’s revengefulness and a woman’s
sensuousness. As psychologist a genius of, médisance;* inexhaustibly rich in means
for creating it; no one knows better how to mix poison with praise. Plebeian in the
lowest instincts and related to Rousseau’s ressentiment: consequently a romantic –
for beneath all romantisme there grunts and thirsts Rousseau’s instinct for revenge.
A revolutionary, but kept tolerably in check by fear. Constrained in presence of

everything possessing strength (public opinion, the Academy, the Court, even PortRoyal).† Embittered against all that is great in men and things, against all that
believes in itself. Enough of a poet and semi-woman to feel greatness as power;
constantly cringing, like the celebrated worm, because he constantly feels himself
trodden on. As a critic without standards, steadiness or backbone, possessing the
palate for a large variety of things of the cosmopolitan libertin but lacking the
courage even to admit his libertinage. As a historian without philosophy, without
the power of philosophical vision – for that reason rejecting, in all the main issues,
the task of passing judgement, holding up ‘objectivity’ as a mask. He comports
himself differently, however, towards questions in which a delicate, experienced
taste is the highest court of appeal: there he really does have the courage for
himself, takes pleasure in himself – there he is a master. – In some respects a
preliminary form of Baudelaire. –

4
The Imitatio Christi* is one of the books I cannot hold in my hand without
experiencing a physiological resistance: it exhales a parfum of the ‘eternal
feminine’† for which one has to be French – or a Wagnerian.… This saint has a
way of talking about love that makes even Parisiennes curious. – I am told that
cunningest of Jesuits, A. Comte, who wanted to lead his Frenchmen to Rome via
the détour of science, inspired himself with this book. I believe it: ‘the religion of
the heart’…

5
G. Eliot. – They have got rid of the Christian God, and now feel obliged to cling all
the more firmly to Christian morality: that is English consistency, let us not blame it
on little bluestockings à la Eliot. In England, in response to every little
emancipation from theology one has to reassert one’s position in a fear-inspiring
manner as a moral fanatic. That is the penance one pays there. – With us it is
different. When one gives up Christian belief one thereby deprives oneself of the
right to Christian morality. For the latter is absolutely not self-evident: one must
make this point clear again and again, in spite of English shallowpates. Christianity
is a system, a consistently thought out and complete view of things. If one breaks
out of it a fundamental idea, the belief in God, one thereby breaks the whole thing
to pieces: one has nothing of any consequence left in one’s hands. Christianity
presupposes that man does not know, cannot know what is good for him and what
evil: he believes in God, who alone knows. Christian morality is a command: its
origin is transcendental; it is beyond all criticism, all right to criticize; it possesses
truth only if God is truth – it stands or falls with the belief in God. – If the English

really do believe they will know, of their own accord, ‘intuitively’, what is good
and evil; if they consequently think they no longer have need of Christianity as a
guarantee of morality; that is merely the consequence of the ascendancy of Christian
evaluation and an expression of the strength and depth of this ascendancy: so that
the origin of English morality has been forgotten, so that the highly conditional
nature of its right to exist is no longer felt. For the Englishman morality is not yet a
problem…

6
George Sand. – I have read the first Lettres d’un voyageur: like everything deriving
from Rousseau false, artificial, fustian, exaggerated. I cannot endure this colouredwallpaper style; nor the vulgar ambition to possess generous feelings. The worst, to
be sure, is the female coquetting with male mannerisms, with the manners of illbred boys. – How cold she must have been withal, this insupportable authoress! She
wound herself up like a clock – and wrote.… Cold, like Hugo, like Balzac, like all
Romantics as soon as they started writing! And how complacently she liked to lie
there, this prolific writing-cow, who had something German in the bad sense about
her, like Rousseau her master, and who was in any case possible only with the
decline of French taste! – But Renan respects her…

7
Moral code for psychologists. – No colportage psychology! Never observe for the
sake of observing! That produces a false perspective, a squint, something forced and
exaggerated. To experience from a desire to experience – that’s no good. In
experiencing, one must not look back towards oneself, or every glance becomes an
‘evil eye’. A born psychologist instinctively guards against seeing for the sake of
seeing; the same applies to the born painter. He never works ‘from nature’ – he
leaves it to his instinct, his camera obscura, to sift and strain ‘nature’, the ‘case’,
the ‘experience’.… He is conscious only of the universal, the conclusion, the
outcome: he knows nothing of that arbitrary abstraction from the individual case. –
What will be the result if one does otherwise? Carries on colportage psychology in,
for example, the manner of Parisian romanciers great and small? It is that sort of
thing which as it were lies in wait for reality, which brings a handful of curiosities
home each evening.… But just see what finally emerges – a pile of daubs, a mosaic
at best, in any event something put together, restless, flashy. The worst in this kind
is achieved by the Goncourts: they never put three sentences together which are not
simply painful to the eye, the psychologist’s eye. – Nature, artistically considered, is
no model. It exaggerates, it distorts, it leaves gaps. Nature is chance. To study
‘from nature’ seems to me a bad sign: it betrays subjection, weakness, fatalism –

this lying in the dust before petits faits* is unworthy of a complete artist. Seeing
what is – that pertains to a different species of spirit, the anti-artistic, the prosaic.
One has to know who one is…

8
Towards a psychology of the artist. – For art to exist, for any sort of aesthetic
activity or perception to exist, a certain physiological precondition is indispensable:
intoxication. Intoxication must first have heightened the excitability of the entire
machine: no art results before that happens. All kinds of intoxication, however
different their origin, have the power to do this: above all, the intoxication of sexual
excitement, the oldest and most primitive form of intoxication. Likewise the
intoxication which comes in the train of all great desires, all strong emotions; the
intoxication of feasting, of contest, of the brave deed, of victory, of all extreme
agitation; the intoxication of cruelty; intoxication in destruction; intoxication under
certain meteorological influences, for example the intoxication of spring; or under
the influence of narcotics; finally the intoxication of the will, the intoxication of an
overloaded and distended will. – The essence of intoxication is the feeling of
plenitude and increased energy. From out of this feeling one gives to things, one
compels them to take, one rapes them – one calls this procedure idealizing. Let us
get rid of a prejudice here: idealization does not consist, as is commonly believed,
in a subtracting or deducting of the petty and secondary. A tremendous expulsion of
the principal features rather is the decisive thing, so that thereupon the others too
disappear.

9
In this condition one enriches everything out of one’s own abundance: what one
sees, what one desires, one sees swollen, pressing, strong, overladen with energy.
The man in this condition transforms things until they mirror his power – until they
are reflections of his perfection. This compulsion to transform into the perfect is –
art. Even all that which he is not becomes for him none the less part of his joy in
himself; in art, man takes delight in himself as perfection. – It would be permissible
to imagine an antithetical condition, a specific anti-artisticality of instinct – a mode
of being which impoverishes and attenuates things and makes them consumptive.
And history is in fact rich in such anti-artists, in such starvelings of life, who
necessarily have to take things to themselves, impoverish them, make them leaner.
This is, for example, the case with the genuine Christian, with Pascal for example: a
Christian who is at the same time an artist does not exist.… Let no one be childish
and cite Raphael as an objection, or some homoeopathic Christian of the nineteenth
century: Raphael said Yes, Raphael did Yes, consequently Raphael was not a

Christian…

10
What is the meaning of the antithetical concepts Apollinian and Dionysian, both
conceived as forms of intoxication, which I introduced into aesthetics?* –
Apollinian intoxication alerts above all the eye, so that it acquires power of vision.
The painter, the sculptor, the epic poet are visionaries par excellence. In the
Dionysian state, on the other hand, the entire emotional system is alerted and
intensified: so that it discharges all its powers of representation, imitation,
transfiguration, transmutation, every kind of mimicry and playacting, conjointly.
The essential thing remains the facility of the metamorphosis, the incapacity not to
react (– in a similar way to certain types of hysteric, who also assume any role at
the slightest instigation). It is impossible for the Dionysian man not to understand
any suggestion of whatever kind, he ignores no signal from the emotions, he
possesses to the highest degree the instinct for understanding and divining, just as
he possesses the art of communication to the highest degree. He enters into every
skin, into every emotion; he is continually transforming himself. – Music, as we
understand it today, is likewise a collective arousal and discharging of the emotions,
but for all that only a vestige of a much fuller emotional world of expression, a
mere residuum of Dionysian histrionicism. To make music possible as a separate art
one had to immobilize a number of senses, above all the muscular sense (at least
relatively: for all rhythm still speaks to our muscles to a certain extent): so that man
no longer straightway imitates and represents bodily everything he feels. None the
less, that is the true Dionysian normal condition, at least its original condition:
music is the gradually-achieved specialization of this at the expense of the most
closely related faculties.

11
The actor, the mime, the dancer, the musician, the lyric poet are fundamentally
related in their instincts and essentially one, only gradually specialized and
separated from one another – even to the point of opposition. The lyric poet stayed
united longest with the musician, the actor with the dancer. – The architect
represents neither a Dionysian nor an Apollinian condition: here it is the mighty act
of will, the will which moves mountains, the intoxication of the strong will, which
demands artistic expression. The most powerful men have always inspired the
architects; the architect has always been influenced by power. Pride, victory over
weight and gravity, the will to power, seek to render themselves visible in a
building; architecture is a kind of rhetoric of power, now persuasive, even cajoling
in form, now bluntly imperious. The highest feeling of power and security finds

expression in that which possesses grand style. Power which no longer requires
proving; which disdains to please; which is slow to answer; which is conscious of
no witness around it; which lives oblivious of the existence of any opposition;
which reposes in itself, fatalistic, a law among laws: that is what speaks of itself in
the form of grand style. –

12
I have read the life of Thomas Carlyle, that unwitting and involuntary farce, that
heroical-moralistical interpretation of dyspepsia. – Carlyle, a man of strong words
and attitudes, a rhetorician from necessity, continually agitated by the desire for a
strong faith and the feeling of incapacity for it (– in this a typical Romantic!) The
desire for a strong faith is not the proof of a strong faith, rather the opposite. If one
has it one may permit oneself the beautiful luxury of scepticism: one is secure
enough, firm enough, fixed enough for it. Carlyle deafens something within him by
the fortissimo of his reverence for men of strong faith and by his rage against the
less single-minded: he requires noise. A continual passionate dishonesty towards
himself – that is his proprium, because of that he is and will remain interesting. –
To be sure, in England he is admired precisely on account of his honesty.… Well,
that is English; and, considering the English are the nation of consummate cant,
even appropriate and not merely understandable. Fundamentally, Carlyle is an
English atheist who wants to be honoured for not being one.

13
Emerson. – Much more enlightened, adventurous, multifarious, refined than
Carlyle; above all, happier.… Such a man as instinctively feeds on pure ambrosia
and leaves alone the indigestible in things. Compared with Carlyle a man of taste. –
Carlyle, who had a great affection for him, nevertheless said of him: ‘He does not
give us enough to bite on’: which may be truly said, but not to the detriment of
Emerson. – Emerson possesses that good-natured and quickwitted cheerfulness that
discourages all earnestness; he has absolutely no idea how old he is or how young
he will be – he could say of himself, in the words of Lope de Vega: ‘yo me sucedo
a mi mismo’.* His spirit is always finding reasons for being contented and even
grateful; and now and then he verges on the cheerful transcendence of that worthy
gentleman who, returning from an amorous rendezvous tamquam re bene gesta,
said gratefully: ‘Ut desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluptas. ‘†

14
Anti-Darwin. – As regards the celebrated ‘struggle for life’, it seems to me for the
present to have been rather asserted than proved. It does occur, but as the exception;

the general aspect of life is not hunger and distress, but rather wealth, luxury, even
absurd prodigality – where there is a struggle it is a struggle for power.… One
should not mistake Malthus for nature. – Supposing, however, that this struggle
exists – and it does indeed occur – its outcome is the reverse of that desired by the
school of Darwin, of that which one ought perhaps to desire with them: namely, the
defeat of the stronger, the more privileged, the fortunate exceptions. Species do not
grow more perfect: the weaker dominate the strong again and again – the reason
being they are the great majority, and they are also cleverer.… Darwin forgot the
mind (– that is English!): the weak possess more mind.… To acquire mind one must
need mind – one loses it when one no longer needs it. He who possesses strength
divests himself of mind (– ‘let it depart!’ they think today in Germany, ‘– the Reich
will still be ours.’…)* One will see that under mind I include foresight, patience,
dissimulation, great self-control, and all that is mimicry (this last includes a great
part of what is called virtue).

15
Psychologist’s casuistry. This man is a human psychologist: what does he really
study men for? He wants to gain little advantages over them, or big ones too – he is
a politician!… This other man is also a human psychologist: and you say he wants
nothing for himself, that he is ‘impersonal’. Take a closer look! Pehaps he wants an
even worse advantage: to feel himself superior to men, to have the right to look
down on them, no longer to confuse himself with them. This ‘impersonal’ man is a
despiser of men: and the former is a more humane species, which may even be clear
from his appearance. At least he thinks himself equal to others, he involves himself
with others…

16
The psychological taste of the Germans seems to me to be called in question by a
whole series of instances which modesty forbids me to enumerate. There is one
instance, however, which offers me a grand opportunity for establishing my thesis: I
bear the Germans a grudge for their having blundered over Kant and his ‘backdoor
philosophy’, as I call it – this was not the pattern of intellectual integrity. – Another
thing I loathe to hear is an infamous ‘and’: the Germans say ‘Goethe and Schiller’ –
I am afraid they say ‘Schiller and Goethe’.… Don’t people know this Schiller yet? –
There are even worse ‘ands’; I have heard ‘Schopenhauer and Hartmann’ with my
own ears, though only among university professors, admittedly…

17
The most spiritual human beings, assuming they are the most courageous, also by

experience by far the most painful tragedies: but it is precisely for this reason that
they honour life, because it brings against them its most formidable weapons.

18
On the subject of ‘intellectual conscience’. – Nothing seems to me to be rarer today
than genuine hypocrisy. I greatly suspect that this plant finds the mild atmosphere
of our culture unendurable. Hypocrisy has its place in the ages of strong belief: in
which even when one is compelled to exhibit a different belief one does not
abandon the belief one already has. Today one does abandon it; or, which is even
more common, one acquires a second belief – one remains honest in any event.
Beyond doubt, a very much larger number of convictions are possible today, than
formerly: possible, that means permitted, that means harmless. That is the origin of
self-tolerance. – Self-tolerance permits one to possess several convictions; these
conciliate one another – they take care, as all the world does today, not to
compromise themselves. How does one compromise oneself today? By being
consistent. By going in a straight line. By being less than ambiguous. By being
genuine.… I greatly fear that modern man is simply too indolent for certain vices:
so that they are actually dying out. All evil which is dependent on strong will – and
perhaps there is nothing evil without strength of will – is degenerating, in our tepid
atmosphere, into virtue.… The few hypocrites I have known impersonated
hypocrisy: they were, like virtually every tenth man nowadays, actors. –

19
Beautiful and ugly.* – Nothing is so conditional, let us say circumscribed, as our
feeling for the beautiful. Anyone who tried to divorce it from man’s pleasure in man
would at once find the ground give way beneath him. The ‘beautiful in itself’ is not
even a concept, merely a phrase. In the beautiful, man sets himself up as the
standard of perfection; in select cases he worships himself in it. A species cannot do
otherwise than affirm itself alone in this manner. Its deepest instinct, that of selfpreservation and self-aggrandizement, is still visible in such sublimated forms. Man
believes that the world itself is filled with beauty – he forgets that it is he who has
created it. He alone has bestowed beauty upon the world – alas! only a very human,
all too human beauty.… Man really mirrors himself in things, that which give him
back his own reflection he considers beautiful: the judgement ‘beautiful’ is his
conceit of his species.… For a tiny suspicion whispers into the sceptic’s ear: is the
world actually made beautiful because man finds it so? Man has humanized the
world: that is all. But there is nothing, absolutely nothing, to guarantee to us that
man constitutes the model for the beautiful. Who knows what figure he would cut in
the eyes of a higher arbiter of taste? Perhaps a presumptuous one? perhaps even

risible? perhaps a little arbitrary?… ‘O Dionysos, divine one, why do you pull my
ears?’ Ariadne once asked her philosophical lover during one of those celebrated
dialogues on Naxos.† ‘I find a kind of humour in your ears, Ariadne: why are they
not longer?’

20
Nothing is beautiful, only man: on this piece of naïvety rests all aesthetics, it is the
first truth of aesthetics. Let us immediately add its second: nothing is ugly but
degenerate man – the domain of aesthetic judgement is therewith defined. –
Reckoned physiologically, everything ugly weakens and afflicts man. It recalls
decay, danger, impotence; he actually suffers a loss of energy in its presence. The
effect of the ugly can be measured with a dynamometer. Whenever man feels in any
way depressed, he senses the proximity of something ‘ugly’. His feeling of power,
his will to power, his courage, his pride – they decline with the ugly, they increase
with the beautiful.… In the one case as in the other we draw a conclusion: its
premises have been accumulated in the instincts in tremendous abundance. The ugly
is understood as a sign and symptom of degeneration: that which recalls
degeneration, however remotely, produces in us the judgement ‘ugly’. Every token
of exhaustion, of heaviness, of age, of weariness, every kind of unfreedom, whether
convulsive or paralytic, above all the smell, colour and shape of dissolution, of
decomposition, though it be attenuated to the point of being no more than a symbol
– all this calls forth the same reaction, the value judgement ‘ugly’. A feeling of
hatred then springs up; what is man then hating? But the answer admits of no
doubt: the decline of his type. He hates then from out of the profoundest instinct of
his species; there is horror, foresight, profundity, far-seeing vision in this hatred – it
is the profoundest hatred there is. It is for its sake that art is profound…

21
Schopenhauer. – Schopenhauer, the last German of any consequence (– who is a
European even like Goethe, like Hegel, like Heinrich Heine, and not merely a
parochial, a ‘national’ one), is for a psychologist a case of the first order: namely, as
a mendacious attempt of genius to marshal, in aid of a nihilistic total devaluation of
life, the very counter-instances, the great self-affirmations of the ‘will to live’, the
exuberant forms of life. He interpreted in turn art, heroism, genius, beauty, grand
sympathy, knowledge, the will to truth, tragedy, as phenomena consequent upon the
‘denial’ of or the thirst to deny the ‘will’ – the greatest piece of psychological falsecoinage in history, Christianity alone excepted. Looked at more closely he is in this
merely the heir of the Christian interpretation: but with this difference, that he knew
how to make what Christianity had rejected, the great cultural facts of mankind, and

approve of them from a Christian, that is to say nihilistic, point of view (– namely
as roads to ‘redemption’, as preliminary forms of ‘redemption’, as stimulants of the
thirst for ‘redemption’…).

22
To take a particular instance: Schopenhauer speaks of beauty with a melancholy
ardour – why, in the last resort? Because he sees it in a bridge upon which one may
pass over, or acquire a thirst to pass over.… It is to him redemption from the ‘will’
for minutes at a time – it lures on to redemption for ever.… He values it especially
as redeemer from the ‘focus of the will’, from sexuality – in beauty he sees the
procreative impulse denied.… Singular saint! Someone contradicts you, and I fear it
is nature. To what end is there beauty at all in the sounds, colours, odours, rhythmic
movements of nature? what makes beauty appear? – Fortunately a philosopher also
contradicts him. No less an authority than the divine Plato (– so Schopenhauer
himself calls him) maintains a different thesis: that all beauty incites to procreation
– that precisely this is the proprium of its effect, from the most sensual regions up
into the most spiritual…

23
Plato goes further. He says, with an innocence for which one must be Greek and not
‘Christian’, that there would be no Platonic philosophy at all if Athens had not
possessed such beautiful youths: it was the sight of them which first plunged the
philosopher’s soul into an erotic whirl and allowed it no rest until it had implanted
the seed of all high things into so beautiful a soil. Another singular saint! – one
doesn’t believe one’s ears, even supposing one believed Plato. One sees, at least,
that philosophizing was different in Athens, above all public. Nothing is less Greek
than the conceptual cobweb-spinning of a hermit, amor intellectualis dei* in the
manner of Spinoza. Philosophy in the manner of Plato should rather be defined as
an erotic contest, as a further development and inward intensification of the old
agonal gymnastics and their presuppositions.… What finally emerged from this
philosophical eroticism of Plato? A new artistic form of the Greek agon, dialectics.
– I further recall, opposing Schopenhauer and to the honour of Plato, that the entire
higher culture and literature of classical France also grew up on the soil of sexual
interest. One may seek everywhere in it for gallantry, sensuality, sexual contest,
‘woman’ – one will never seek in vain…

24
L’art pour l’art.† – The struggle against purpose in art is always a struggle against
the moralizing tendency in art, against the subordination of art to morality. L’art

pour l’art means: ‘the devil take morality!’ – But this very hostility betrays that
moral prejudice is still dominant. When one has excluded from art the purpose of
moral preaching and human improvement it by no means follows that art is
completely purposeless, goalless, meaningless, in short l’art pour l’art – a snake
biting its own tail. ‘Rather no purpose at all than a moral purpose!’ – thus speaks
mere passion. A psychologist asks on the other hand: what does all art do? does it
not praise? does it not glorify? does it not select? does it not highlight? By doing all
this it strengthens or weakens certain valuations.… Is this no more than an
incidental? an accident? Something in which the instinct of the artist has no part
whatever? Or is it not rather the prerequisite for the artist’s being an artist at all.…
Is his basic instinct directed towards art, or is it not rather directed towards the
meaning of art, which is life? towards a desideratum of life? – Art is the great
stimulus to life: how could it be thought purposeless, aimless, l’art pour l’art? One
question remains: art also brings to light much that is ugly, hard, questionable in life
– does it not thereby seem to suffer from life? – And there have indeed been
philosophers who lent it this meaning: Schopenhauer taught that the whole object of
art was to ‘liberate from the will’, and he revered tragedy because its greatest
function was to ‘dispose one to resignation’. – But this – as I have already intimated
– is a pessimist’s perspective and ‘evil eye’ – : one must appeal to the artists
themselves. What does the tragic artist communicate of himself? Does he not
display precisely the condition of fearlessness in the face of the fearsome and
questionable? – This condition itself is a high desideratum: he who knows it
bestows on it the highest honours. He communicates it, he has to communicate it if
he is an artist, a genius of communication. Bravery and composure in the face of a
powerful enemy, great hardship, a problem that arouses aversion – it is this
victorious condition which the tragic artist singles out, which he glorifies. In the
face of tragedy the warlike in our soul celebrates its Saturnalias; whoever is
accustomed to suffering, whoever seeks out suffering, the heroic man extols his
existence by means of tragedy – for him alone does the tragic poet pour this draught
of sweetest cruelty. –

25
To put up with men, to keep open house in one’s heart – this is liberal, but no more
than liberal. One knows hearts which are capable of noble hospitality, which have
curtained windows and closed shutters: they keep their best rooms empty. Why do
they so? – Because they await guests with whom one does not have to ‘put up’…

26
We no longer have a sufficiently high estimate of ourselves when we communicate.

Our true experiences are not garrulous. They could not communicate themselves if
they wanted to: they lack words. We have already grown beyond whatever we have
words for. In all talking there lies a grain of contempt. Speech, it seems, was
devised only for the average, medium, communicable. The speaker has already
vulgarized himself by speaking. – From a moral code for deaf-mutes and other
philosophers.

27
‘This picture is enchanting fair!’*… The literary woman, unsatisfied, agitated,
desolate in heart and entrails, listening every minute with painful curiosity to the
imperative which whispers from the depths of her organism ‘aut liberi aut libri’:†
the literary woman, cultured enough to understand the voice of nature even when it
speaks Latin, and on the other hand vain enough and enough of a goose to say
secretly to herself in French ‘je me verrai, je me lirai, je m’extasierai et je dirai:
Possible, que j’aie eu tant d’esprit?’…‡

28
The ‘impersonal’ take the floor. – ‘We find nothing easier than being wise, patient,
superior. We drip with the oil of forbearance and sympathy, we are absurdly just,
we forgive everything. For that very reason we ought to discipline ourselves a little;
for that very reason we ought to cultivate a little emotion, a little emotional vice,
from time to time. It may be hard for us; and among ourselves we may perhaps
laugh at the appearance we thus present. But what of that! We no longer have any
other mode of self-overcoming available to us: this is our asceticism, our penance’.
… Becoming personal – the virtue of the ‘impersonal’…

29
From a doctorate exam. – ‘What is the task of all higher education?’ – To turn a
man into a machine. – ‘By what means?’ – He has to learn how to feel bored. –
‘How is that achieved?’ – Through the concept of duty. – ‘Who is his model?’ –
The philologist: he teaches how to grind.* – ‘Who is the perfect man?’ – The civil
servant. – ‘Which philosophy provides the best formula for the civil servant?’ –
Kant’s: the civil servant as thing in itself set as judge over the civil servant as
appearance. –

30
The right to stupidity. – The wearied and slow-breathing worker, good-natured,
letting things take their course: this typical figure, who is now, in the Age of Work
(and of the ‘Reich’!), encountered in all classes of society, is today laying claim

even to art, including the book and above all the journal – how much more to the
beauties of nature, to Italy.… The man of the evening, with the ‘wild instincts lulled
to sleep’ of which Faust speaks.† requires the health resort, the seaside, the glaciers,
Bayreuth.‡… In ages like this, art has a right to pure folly§ – as a kind of holiday
for the spirit, the wits and the heart. Wagner understood that. Pure folly is a
restorative…

31
Another problem of diet. – The means by which Julius Caesar defended himself
against sickliness and headache: tremendous marches, the simplest form of living,
uninterrupted sojourn in the open air, continuous toil – these, broadly speaking, are
the universal preservative and protective measures against the extreme vulnerability
of that subtle machine working at the highest pressure which is called genius. –

32
The immoralist speaks. – Nothing offends a philosopher’s taste more than man
when he expresses desires.… When the philosopher sees man only in his activity,
when he sees this bravest, cunningest, toughest of animals straying even into
labyrinthine calamities, how admirable man seems to him! He encourages him.…
But the philosopher despises desiring man, and the ‘desirable’ man too – he
despises all the desiderata, all the ideals of man. If a philosopher could be a nihilist,
he would be one because he finds nothingness behind all the ideals of men. Or not
even nothingness merely – but only the worthless, the absurd, the sick, the
cowardly, the weary, dregs of all kinds from the cup of his life after he has drained
it.… How does it come about that man, so admirable as a reality, deserves no
respect when he expresses desires? Does he have to atone for being so able as a
reality? Does he have to compensate for his activity, for the exertion of will and
hand involved in all activity, with a relaxation in the imaginary and absurd? – The
history of his desiderata has hitherto been the partie honteuse* of man: one should
take care not to read too long in it. What justifies man is his reality – it will justify
him eternally. How much more valuable an actual man is compared with any sort of
merely desired, dreamed of, odious lie of a man? with any sort of ideal man?…
And it is only the ideal man who offends the philosopher’s taste.

33
The natural value of egoism. – The value of egoism depends on the physiological
value of him who possesses it: it can be very valuable, it can be worthless and
contemptible. Every individual may be regarded as representing the ascending or
descending line of life. When one has decided which, one has thereby established a

canon for the value of his egoism. If he represents the ascending line his value is in
fact extraordinary – and for the sake of the life-collective, which with him takes a
step forward, the care expended on his preservation, on the creation of optimum
conditions for him, may even be extreme. For the individual, the ‘single man’, as
people and philosophers have hitherto understood him, is an error: he does not
constitute a separate entity, an atom, a ‘link in the chain’, something merely
inherited from the past – he constitutes the entire single line ‘man’ up to and
including himself.… If he represents the descending development, decay, chronic
degeneration, sickening (– sickness is, broadly speaking, already a phenomenon
consequent upon decay, not the cause of it), then he can be accorded little value,
and elementary fairness demands that he takes away as little as possible from the
well-constituted. He is not better than a parasite on them…

34
Christian and anarchist. – When the anarchist, as the mouthpiece of declining strata
of society, demands with righteous indignation ‘his rights’, ‘justice’, ‘equal rights’,
he is only acting under the influence of his want of culture, which prevents his
understanding why he is really suffering – in what respect he is impoverished, in
life.… A cause-creating drive is powerful within him: someone must be to blame
for his feeling vile.… His ‘righteous indignation’ itself already does him good;
every poor devil finds pleasure in scolding – it gives him a little of the intoxication
of power. Even complaining and wailing can give life a charm for the sake of which
one endures it: there is a small dose of revenge in every complaint, one reproaches
those who are different for one’s feeling vile, sometimes even with one’s being vile,
as if they had perpetrated an injustice or possessed an impermissible privilege. ‘If I
am canaille, you ought to be so too’: on the basis of this logic one makes
revolutions. – Complaining is never of any use: it comes from weakness. Whether
one attributes one’s feeling vile to others or to oneself – the Socialist does the
former, the Christian for example the latter – makes no essential difference. What is
common to both, and unworthy in both, is that someone has to be to blame for the
fact that one suffers – in short, that the sufferer prescribes for himself the honey of
revenge as a medicine for his suffering. The objectives of this thirst for revenge as a
thirst for pleasure vary according to circumstances: the sufferer finds occasions
everywhere for cooling his petty revengefulness – if he is a Christian, to say it
again, he finds them in himself.… The Christian and the anarchist – both are
décadents. – And when the Christian condemns, calumniates and befouls the
‘world’, he does so from the same instinct from which the Socialist worker
condemns, calumniates and befouls society: even the ‘Last Judgement’ is still the
sweet consolation of revenge – the revolution, such as the Socialist worker too

anticipates, only conceived of as somewhat more distant.… Even the ‘Beyond’ –
why a Beyond if not as a means of befouling the Here-and-Now?…

35
A criticism of décadence morality. – An ‘altruistic’ morality, a morality under
which egoism languishes – is under all circumstances a bad sign. This applies to
individuals, it applies especially to peoples. The best are lacking when egoism
begins to be lacking. To choose what is harmful to oneself, to be attracted by
‘disinterested’ motives, almost constitutes the formula for décadence. ‘Not to seek
one’s own advantage’ – that is merely a moral figleaf for a quite different, namely
physiological fact: ‘I no longer know how to find my advantage’.… Disgregation of
the instincts! – Man is finished when he becomes altruistic. – Instead of saying
simply ‘I am no longer worth anything’, the moral lie in the mouth of the décadent
says: ‘Nothing is worth anything – life is not worth anything’.… Such a judgement
represents, after all, a grave danger, it is contagious – on the utterly morbid soil of
society it soon grows up luxuriously, now in the form of religion (Christianity), now
in that of philosophy (Schopen-hauerism). In some circumstances the vapours of
such a poison-tree jungle sprung up out of putrefaction can poison life for years
ahead, for thousands of years ahead…

36
A moral code for physicians. – The invalid is a parasite on society. In a certain state
it is indecent to go on living. To vegetate on in cowardly dependence on physicians
and medicaments after the meaning of life, the right to life, has been lost ought to
entail the profound contempt of society. Physicians, in their turn, ought to be the
communicators of this contempt – not prescriptions, but every day a fresh dose of
disgust with their patients.… To create a new responsibility, that of the physician,
in all cases in which the highest interest of life, of ascending life, demands the most
ruthless suppression and sequestration of degenerating life – for example in
determining the right to reproduce, the right to be born, the right to live.… To die
proudly when it is no longer possible to live proudly. Death of one’s own free
choice, death at the proper time, with a clear head and with joyfulness,
consummated in the midst of children and witnesses: so that an actual leave-taking
is possible while he who is leaving is still there, likewise an actual evaluation of
what has been desired and what achieved in life, an adding-up of life – all of this in
contrast to the pitiable and horrible comedy Christianity has made of the hour of
death. One should never forget of Christianity that it has abused the weakness of the
dying to commit conscience-rape and even the mode of death to formulate value
judgements on men and the past! – Here, every cowardice of prejudice

notwithstanding, it is above all a question of establishing the correct, that is
physiological evaluation of so-called natural death: which is, after all, also only an
‘unnatural’ death, an act of suicide. One perishes by no one but oneself. Only
‘natural’ death is death for the most contemptible reasons, an unfree death, a death
at the wrong time, a coward’s death. From love of life one ought to desire to die
differently from this: freely, consciously, not accidentally, not suddenly overtaken.
… Finally, a piece of advice for messieurs the pessimists and other décadents. We
have no power to prevent ourselves being born: but we can rectify this error – for it
is sometimes an error. When one does away with oneself one does the most
estimable thing possible: one thereby almost deserves to live.… Society – what am I
saying! life itself derives more advantage from that than from any sort of ‘life’ spent
in renunciation, green-sickness and other virtues – one has freed others from having
to endure one’s sight, one has removed an objection from life.… Pessimism, pur,
vert* proves itself only by the self-negation of messieurs the pessimists: one must
take their logic a step further, and not deny life merely in ‘will and idea’, as
Schopenhauer did – one must first of all deny Schopenhauer.… Pessimism, by the
by, however contagious it may be, nevertheless does not add to the morbidity of an
age or a race in general: it is the expression of this morbidity. One succumbs to it as
one succumbs to cholera: one’s constitution must already be sufficiently morbid.
Pessimism does not of itself make a single additional décadent, I recall that
statistics show that the years in which cholera rages do not differ from other years
in the total number of deaths.

37
Whether we have grown more moral. – As was only to be expected, the whole
ferocity of the moral stupidity which, as is well known, is considered morality as
such in Germany, has launched itself against my concept ‘beyond good and evil’: I
could tell some pretty stories about it. Above all, I was invited to reflect on the
‘undeniable superiority’ of our age in moral judgement, our real advance in this
respect: compared with us, a Cesare Borgia was certainly not to be set up as a
‘higher man’, as a kind of superman, in the way I set him up.… A Swiss editor, that
of the ‘Bund’, went so far – not without expressing his admiration of the courage
for so hazardous an enterprise – as to ‘understand’ that the meaning of my work lay
in a proposal to abolish all decent feeling. Much obliged!* – by way of reply I
permit myself to raise the question whether we have really grown more moral. That
all the world believes so is already an objection to it.… We modern men, very
delicate, very vulnerable and paying and receiving consideration in a hundred ways,
imagine in fact that this sensitive humanity which we represent, this achieved
unanimity in forbearance, in readiness to help, in mutual trust, is a positive advance,

that with this we have gone far beyond the men of the Renaissance. But every age
thinks in this way, has to think in this way. What is certain is that we would not
dare to place ourselves in Renaissance circumstances, or even imagine ourselves in
them: our nerves could not endure that reality, not to speak of our muscles. This
incapacity, however, demonstrates, not an advance, but only a different, a more
belated constitution, a weaker, more delicate, more vulnerable one, out of which is
necessarily engendered a morality which is full of consideration. If we think away
our delicacy and belatedness, our physiological ageing, then our morality of
‘humanization’ too loses its value at once – no morality has any value in itself – :
we would even despise it. On the other hand, let us be in no doubt that we modern
men, with our thick padding of humanity which dislikes to give the slightest
offence, would provide the contemporaries of Cesare Borgia with a side-splitting
comedy. We are, in fact, involuntarily funny beyond all measure, we with our
modern ‘virtues’.… The decay of our hostile and mistrust-arousing instincts – and
that is what constitutes our ‘advance’ – represents only one of the effects attending
our general decay of vitality: it costs a hundred times more effort, more foresight, to
preserve so dependent, so late an existence as we are. Here everyone helps everyone
else, here everyone is to a certain degree an invalid and everyone a nurse. This is
then called ‘virtue’ – : among men who knew a different kind of life, a fuller, more
prodigal, more overflowing life, it would be called something else: ‘cowardice’,
perhaps, ‘pitiableness’, ‘old woman’s morality’.… Our softening of customs – this
is my thesis, my innovation if you like – is a consequence of decline; stern and
frightful customs can, conversely, be a consequence of a superabundance of life.
For in the latter case much may be risked, much demanded and much squandered.
What was formerly a spice of life would be poison to us.… We are likewise too old,
too belated, to be capable of indifference –also a form of strength: our morality of
pity, against which I was the first to warn, that which one might call
l’impressionisme morale, is one more expression of the physiological overexcitability pertaining to everything décadent. That movement which with
Schopenhauer’s morality of pity attempted to present itself as scientific – a very
unsuccessful attempt! – is the actual décadence movement in morality; as such it is
profoundly related to Christian morality. Strong ages, noble cultures, see in pity, in
‘love of one’s neighbour’, in a lack of self and self-reliance, something
contemptible. – Ages are to be assessed according to their positive forces – and by
this assessment the age of the Renaissance, so prodigal and so fateful, appears as
the last great age, and we, we moderns with our anxious care for ourselves and love
of our neighbour, with our virtues of work, of unpretentiousness, of fair play, of
scientificality – acquisitive, economical, machine-minded – appear as a weak age.…
Our virtues are conditioned, are demanded by our weakness.… ‘Equality’, a certain
actual rendering similar of which the theory of ‘equal rights’ is only the expression,

belongs essentially to decline: the chasm between man and man, class and class, the
multiplicity of types, the will to be oneself, to stand out – that which I call pathos of
distance – characterizes every strong age. The tension, the range between the
extremes is today growing less and less – the extremes themselves are finally
obliterated to the point of similarity.… All our political theories and state
constitutions, the ‘German Reich ‘certainly not excluded, are consequences,
necessary effects of decline; the unconscious influence of décadence has gained
ascendancy even over the ideals of certain of the sciences. My objection to the
whole of sociology in England and France is that it knows from experience only the
decaying forms of society and takes its own decaying instincts with perfect
innocence as the norm of sociological value judgement. Declining life, the
diminution of all organizing power, that is to say the power of separating, of
opening up chasms, of ranking above and below, formulates itself in the sociology
of today as the ideal.… Our Socialists are décadents, but Mr Herbert Spencer is
also a décadent – he sees in the victory of altruism something desirable!…

38
My conception of freedom. – The value of a thing sometimes lies not in what one
attains with it, but in what one pays for it – what it costs us. I give an example.
Liberal institutions immediately cease to be liberal as soon as they are attained:
subsequently there is nothing more thoroughly harmful to freedom than liberal
institutions. One knows, indeed, what they bring about: they undermine the will to
power, they are the levelling of mountain and valley exalted to a moral principle,
they make small, cowardly and smug – it is the herd animal which triumphs with
them every time. Liberalism: in plain words, reduction to the herd animal.… As
long as they are still being fought for, these same institutions produce quite different
effects; they then in fact promote freedom mightily. Viewed more closely, it is war
which produces these effects, war for liberal institutions which as war permits the
illiberal instincts to endure. And war is a training in freedom. For what is freedom?
That one has the will to self-responsibility. That one preserves the distance which
divides us. That one has become more indifferent to hardship, toil, privation, even
to life. That one is ready to sacrifice men to one’s cause, oneself not excepted.
Freedom means that the manly instincts that delight in war and victory have gained
mastery over the other instincts – for example, over the instinct for ‘happiness’. The
man who has become free – and how much more the mind that has become free –
spurns the contemptible sort of well-being dreamed of by shopkeepers, Christians,
cows, women, Englishmen and other democrats. The free man is a warrior. – How
is freedom measured, in individuals as in nations? By the resistance which has to be
overcome, by the effort it costs to stay aloft. One would have to seek the highest

type of free man where the greatest resistance is constantly being overcome: five
steps from tyranny, near the threshold of the danger of servitude. This is true
psychologically when one understands by ‘tyrants’ pitiless and dreadful instincts, to
combat which demands the maximum of authority and discipline towards oneself –
finest type Julius Caesar –; it is also true politically: one has only to look at history.
The nations which were worth something, which became worth something, never
became so under liberal institutions: it was great danger which made of them
something deserving reverence, danger which first teaches us to know our
resources, our virtues, our shield and spear, our spirit – which compels us to be
strong.… First principle: one must need strength, otherwise one will never have it.
– Those great forcing-houses for strong human beings, for the strongest kind there
has ever been, the aristocratic communities of the pattern of Rome and Venice,
understood freedom in precisely the sense which I understand the word ‘freedom’:
as something one has and does not have, something one wants, something one
conquers…

39
Criticism of modernity. – Our institutions are no longer fit for anything: everyone is
unanimous about that. But the fault lies not in them but in us. Having lost all the
instincts out of which institutions grow, we are losing the institutions themselves,
because we are no longer fit for them. Democracy has always been the declining
form of the power to organize: I have already, in Human, All Too Human,
characterized modern democracy, together with its imperfect manifestations such as
the ‘German Reich’, as the decaying form of the state. For institutions to exist there
must exist the kind of will, instinct, imperative which is anti-liberal to the point of
malice: the will to tradition, to authority, to centuries-long responsibility, to
solidarity between succeeding generations backwards and forwards in infinitum. If
this will is present, there is established something such as the Imperium Romanum:
or such as Russia, the only power today which has durability in it, which can wait,
which can still promise something – Russia, the antithesis of that pitiable European
petty-state politics and nervousness which with the foundation of the German Reich
has entered a critical phase.… The entire West has lost those instincts out of which
institutions grow, out of which the future grows: perhaps nothing goes so much
against the grain of its ‘modern spirit’ as this. One lives for today, one lives very
fast – one lives very irresponsibly: it is precisely this which one calls ‘freedom’.
That which makes institutions institutions is despised, hated, rejected: whenever the
word ‘authority’ is so much as heard one believes oneself in danger of a new
slavery. The décadence in the valuating instinct of our politicians, our political
parties, goes so deep that they instinctively prefer that which leads to dissolution,

that which hastens the end.… Witness modern marriage. It is obvious that all sense
has gone out of modern marriage: which is, however, no objection to marriage but
to modernity. The rationale of marriage lay in the legal sole responsibility of the
man: marriage thereby had a centre of gravity, whereas now it limps with both legs.
The rationale of marriage lay in its indissolubility in principle: it thereby acquired
an accent which could make itself heard against the accidents of feeling, passion
and the moment. It lay likewise in the responsibility of the families for the selection
of mates. With the increasing indulgence of love matches one has simply eliminated
the foundation of marriage, that alone which makes it an institution. One never
establishes an institution on the basis of an idiosyncrasy, one does not, as aforesaid,
establish marriage on the basis of ‘love’ – one establishes it on the basis of the
sexual drive, the drive to own property (wife and child considered as property), the
drive to dominate which continually organizes the smallest type of domain, the
family, which needs children and heirs so as to retain, in a physiological sense as
well, an achieved measure of power, influence, wealth, so as to prepare for
protracted tasks, for a solidarity of instinct between the centuries. Marriage as an
institution already includes in itself the affirmation of the largest, the most enduring
form of organization: if society as a whole cannot stand security for itself to the
most distant generations, then marriage has really no meaning. – Modern marriage
has lost its meaning – consequently it is being abolished.

40
The labour question. – The stupidity, fundamentally the instinct degeneration which
is the cause of every stupidity today, lies in the existence of a labour question at all.
About certain things one does not ask questions: first imperative of instinct. – I
simply cannot see what one wishes to do with the European worker now one has
made a question of him. He finds himself far too well placed not to go on asking for
more, or to ask more and more impudently. After all, he has the great majority on
his side. There is absolutely no hope left that a modest and self-sufficient kind of
human being, a type of Chinaman, should here form itself into a class: and this
would have been sensible, this was actually a necessity. What has one done? –
Everything designed to nip in the bud even the prerequisites for it – through the
most irresponsible thoughtlessness one has totally destroyed the instincts by virtue
of which the worker becomes possible as a class, possible for himself. The worker
has been made liable for military service, he has been allowed to form unions and to
vote: no wonder the worker already feels his existence to be a state of distress
(expressed in moral terms as a state of injustice). But what does one want? – to ask
it again. If one wills an end, one must also will the means to it: if one wants slaves,
one is a fool if one educates them to be masters. –

41
‘Freedom as I do not mean it.*…’ – In times like these, to have to rely on one’s
instincts is one fatality more. These instincts contradict, disturb and destroy one
another; I have already defined the modern as physiological self-contradiction. The
rationale of education would seem to require that at least one of these instinctsystems should be paralysed beneath an iron pressure, so as to permit another to
come into force, become strong, become master. Today the only way of making the
individual possible would be by pruning him: possible, that is to say complete.…
The reverse is what actually happens: the claim to independence, to free
development, to laisser aller, is advanced most heatedly by precisely those for
whom no curb could be too strong – this applies in politics, it applies in art. But this
is a symptom of décadence: our modern concept ‘freedom’ is one more proof of
degeneration of instinct. –

42
Where faith is needed. – Nothing is rarer among moralists and saints than integrity;
perhaps they say the opposite, perhaps they even believe it. For when faith is more
useful, effective, convincing than conscious hypocrisy, hypocrisy instinctively and
forthwith becomes innocent: first principle for the understanding of great saints. In
the case of philosophers too, a different kind of saint, their entire trade demands that
they concede only certain truths: namely those through which their trade receives
public sanction – in Kantian terms, truths of practical reason. They know what they
have to prove, they are practical in that – they recognize one another by their
agreement over ‘truths’. – ‘Thou shalt not lie’ – in plain words: take care,
philosopher, not to tell the truth…

43
In the ear of the Conservatives. – What was formerly not known, what is known
today or could be known – a reversion, a turning back in any sense and to any
degree, is quite impossible. We physiologists at least know that. But all priests and
moralists have believed it was possible – they have wanted to take mankind back,
force it back, to an earlier standard of virtue. Morality has always been a bed of
Procrustes. Even politicians have in this matter imitated the preachers of virtue:
even today there are parties whose goal is a dream of the crabwise retrogression of
all things. But no one is free to be a crab. There is nothing for it: one has to go
forward, which is to say step by step further into décadence (– this is my definition
of modern ‘progress’…). One can retard this development and, through retardation,
dam and gather up degeneration itself and make it more vehement and sudden: more

one cannot do. –

44
My conception of the genius. – Great men, like great epochs, are explosive material
in whom tremendous energy has been accumulated; their prerequisite has always
been, historically and physiologically, that a protracted assembling, accumulating,
economizing and preserving has preceded them – that there has been no explosion
for a long time. If the tension in the mass has grown too great the merest accidental
stimulus suffices to call the ‘genius’, the ‘deed’, the great destiny, into the world.
Of what account then are circumstances, the epoch, the Zeitgeist, public opinion! –
Take the case of Napoleon. The France of the Revolution, and even more preRevolution France, would have brought forth the type antithetical to Napoleon: it
did bring it forth, moreover. And because Napoleon was different, the heir of a
stronger, longer, older civilization than that which was going up in dust and smoke
in France, he became master here, he alone was master here. Great human beings
are necessary, the epoch in which they appear is accidental; that they almost always
become master of their epoch is only because they are stronger, because they are
older, because a longer assembling of force has preceded them. The relationship
between a genius and his epoch is the same as that between strong and weak, and as
that between old and young: the epoch is always relatively much younger, less
substantial, more immature, less sure of itself, more childish. – That they have very
different ideas on this subject in France today (in Germany too, but that is of no
consequence), that there the theory of milieu, a real neurotic’s theory, has become
sacrosanct and almost scientific and finds credence even among physiologists – that
fact has an ‘ill odour’ and gives one sadly to think. – The same ideas are believed in
England too, but no one will lose any sleep over that. The Englishman has only two
possible ways of coming to terms with the genius and ‘great man’: either the
democratic way in the manner of Buckle or the religious way in the manner of
Carlyle. – The danger which lies in great human beings and great epochs is
extraordinary; sterility, exhaustion of every kind follow in their footsteps. The great
human being is a terminus; the great epoch, the Renaissance for example, is a
terminus. The genius – in his works, in his deeds – is necessarily a prodigal: his
greatness lies in the fact that he expends himself.… The instinct of self-preservation
is as it were suspended; the overwhelming pressure of the energies which emanate
from him forbids him any such care and prudence. One calls this ‘sacrifice’; one
praises his ‘heroism’ therein, his indifference to his own interests, his devotion to an
idea, a great cause, a fatherland: all misunderstandings.… He flows out, he
overflows, he uses himself up, he does not spare himself – with inevitability,
fatefully, involuntarily, as a river’s bursting its banks is involuntary. But because

one owes a great deal to such explosive beings one has bestowed a great deal upon
them in return, for example a species of higher morality.… For that is the nature of
human gratitude: it misunderstands its benefactors. –

45
The criminal and what is related to him. – The criminal type is the type of the
strong human being under unfavourable conditions, a strong human being made
sick. What he lacks is the wilderness, a certain freer and more perilous nature and
form of existence in which all that is attack and defence in the instinct of the strong
human being comes into its own. His virtues have been excommunicated by society;
the liveliest drives within him forthwith blend with the depressive emotions, with
suspicion, fear, dishonour. But this is almost the recipe for physiological
degeneration. He who has to do in secret what he does best and most likes to do,
with protracted tension, caution, slyness, becomes anaemic; and because he has
never harvested anything from his instincts but danger, persecution, disaster, his
feelings too turn against these instincts – he feels them to be a fatality. It is society,
our tame, mediocre, gelded society, in which a human being raised in nature, who
comes from the mountains or from adventures of the sea, necessarily degenerates
into a criminal. Or almost necessarily: for there are cases in which such a human
being proves stronger than society: the Corsican Napoleon is the most famous case.
In regard to the problem before us the testimony of Dostoyevsky is of importance –
Dostoyevsky, the only psychologist, by the way, from whom I had anything to
learn: he is one of the happiest accidents of my life, even more so than my
discovery of Stendhal. This profound human being, who was ten times justified in
despising the superficial Germans, found the Siberian convicts in whose midst he
lived for a long time, nothing but the worst criminals for whom no return to society
was possible, very different from what he himself had expected – he found them to
be carved out of about the best, hardest and most valuable timber growing anywhere
on Russian soil. Let us generalize the case of the criminal: let us think of natures
which, for whatever reason, lack public approval, which know they are not
considered beneficial or useful, that Chandala feeling that one is considered not an
equal but as thrust out, as unworthy, as a source of pollution. The colour of the
subterranean is on the thoughts and actions of such natures; everything in them
becomes paler than in those upon whose existence the light of day reposes. But
virtually every form of existence which we treat with distinction today formerly
lived in this semi-gravelike atmosphere: the scientific nature, the artist, the genius,
the free spirit, the actor, the merchant, the great discoverer.… As long as the priest
was considered the highest type every valuable kind of human being was disvalued.
… The time is coming – I promise it – when he will be considered the lowest, as

our Chandala, as the most mendacious, as the most indecent kind of human being.
… I draw attention to the fact that even now, under the mildest rule of custom
which has ever obtained on earth or at any rate in Europe, every kind of apartness,
every protracted, all too protracted keeping under, every uncommon, untransparent
form of existence, brings men close to that type of which the criminal is the
perfection. All innovators of the spirit bear for a time the pallid, fatalistic sign of the
Chandala on their brow: not because they are felt to be so, but because they
themselves feel the terrible chasm which divides them from all that is traditional
and held in honour. Almost every genius knows as one of the phases of his
development the ‘Catilinarian existence’, a feeling of hatred, revengefulness and
revolt against everything which already is, which is no longer becoming.… Catiline
– the antecedent form of every Caesar. –

46
Here is the prospect free.* – When a philosopher keeps silent, it can be loftiness of
soul; when he contradicts himself, it can be love; a politeness which tells lies is
possible in men of knowledge. Not without subtlety was it said: il est indigne des
grands coeurs de répandre le trouble qu’ils ressentent:† only one has to add that
not to fear the unworthiest things can likewise be greatness of soul. A woman who
loves sacrifices her honour; a man of knowledge who ‘loves’ sacrifices perhaps his
humanity; a god who loved became a Jew…

47
Beauty no accident. – Even the beauty of a race or a family, the charm and
benevolence of their whole demeanour, is earned by labour: like genius, it is the
final result of the accumulatory labour of generations. One must have made great
sacrifices to good taste, one must for its sake have done many things, left many
things undone – the French seventeenth century is admirable in both – one must
have possessed in it a selective principle in respect of one’s society, residence,
dress, sexual gratification, one must have preferred beauty to advantage, habit,
opinion, indolence. Supreme rule of conduct: even when alone one must not ‘let
oneself go’. – Good things are costly beyond measure: and the law still holds that
he who has them is different from him who obtains them. Everything good is
inheritance: what is not inherited is imperfect, is a beginning…. In Athens at the
time of Cicero, who expressed his surprise at it, the men and youths were of far
superior beauty to the women: but what labour and exertion in the service of beauty
the male sex of that place had for centuries demanded of themselves! – For one
must not mistake the method involved here: a mere disciplining of thoughts and
feelings is virtually nothing (– here lies the great mistake of German culture, which

is totally illusory): one first has to convince the body. The strict maintenance of a
significant and select demeanour, an obligation to live only among men who do not
‘let themselves go’, completely suffices for becoming significant and select: in two
or three generations everything is already internalized. It is decisive for the fortune
of nations and of mankind that one should inaugurate culture in the right place – not
in the ‘soul’ (as has been the fateful superstition of priests and quasi-priests): the
right place is the body, demeanour, diet, physiology: the rest follows…. This is why
the Greeks remain the supreme cultural event of history – they knew, they did what
needed to be done; Christianity, which despised the body, has up till now been
mankind’s greatest misfortune. –

48
Progress in my sense. – I too speak of a ‘return to nature’, although it is not really a
going-back but a going-up – up into a high, free, even frightful nature and
naturalness, such as plays with great tasks, is permitted to play with them…. To
speak in a parable: Napoleon was a piece of ‘return to nature’ as I understand it (for
example in rebus tacticis* even more, as military men know, in strategy). – But
Rousseau – where did he really want to return to? Rousseau, this first modern man,
idealist, and canaille in one person; who needed moral ‘dignity’ in order to endure
his own aspect; sick with unbridled vanity and unbridled self-contempt. Even this
abortion recumbent on the threshold of the new age wanted a ‘return to nature’ –
where, to ask it again, did Rousseau want to return to? – I hate Rousseau even in
the Revolution: it is the world-historical expression of this duplicity of idealist and
canaille. The bloody farce enacted by this Revolution, its ‘immorality’, does not
concern me much: what I hate is its Rousseauesque morality – the so-called ‘truths’
of the Revolution through which it is still an active force and persuades everything
shallow and mediocre over to its side. The doctrine of equality!… But there exists
no more poisonous poison: for it seems to be preached by justice itself, while it is
the termination of justice…. ‘Equality for equals, inequality for unequals’ – that
would be the true voice of justice: and, what follows from it, ‘Never make equal
what is unequal’. – That such dreadful and bloody happenings have surrounded this
doctrine of equality has given this ‘modern idea’ par excellence a kind of glory and
lurid glow, so that the Revolution as a spectacle has seduced even the noblest
spirits. That is, however, no reason for esteeming it any more highly. – I see only
one who experienced it as it has to be experienced – with disgust – Goethe…

49
Goethe – not a German event but a European one: a grand attempt to overcome the
eighteenth century through a return to nature, through a going-up to the naturalness

of the Renaissance, a kind of self-overcoming on the part of that century. – He bore
within him its strongest instincts: sentimentality, nature-idolatry, the anti-historical,
the idealistic, the unreal and revolutionary (– the last is only a form of the unreal).
He called to his aid history, the natural sciences, antiquity, likewise Spinoza, above
all practical activity; he surrounded himself with nothing but closed horizons; he did
not sever himself from life, he placed himself within it; nothing could discourage
him and he took as much as possible upon himself, above himself, within himself.
What he aspired to was totality; he strove against the separation of reason,
sensuality, feeling, will (– preached in the most horrible scholasticism by Kant, the
antipodes of Goethe); he disciplined himself to a whole, he created himself….
Goethe was, in an epoch disposed to the unreal, a convinced realist: he affirmed
everything which was related to him in this respect – he had no greater experience
than that ens realissimum called Napoleon. Goethe conceived of a strong, highly
cultured human being, skilled in all physical accomplishments, who, keeping
himself in check and having reverence for himself, dares to allow himself the whole
compass and wealth of naturalness, who is strong enough for this freedom; a man of
tolerance, not out of weakness, but out of strength, because he knows how to
employ to his advantage what would destroy an average nature; a man to whom
nothing is forbidden, except it be weakness, whether that weakness be called vice or
virtue…. A spirit thus emancipated stands in the midst of the universe with a joyful
and trusting fatalism, in the faith that only what is separate and individual may be
rejected, that in the totality everything is redeemed and affirmed – he no longer
denies…. But such a faith is the highest of all possible faiths: I have baptized it with
the name Dionysos. –

50
One could say that in a certain sense the nineteenth century has also striven for
what Goethe as a person strove for: universality in the understanding and
affirmation, amenability to experience of whatever kind, reckless realism, reverence
for everything factual. How does it happen that the total result is not a Goethe but a
chaos, a nihilistic sigh, a not knowing which way to turn, an instinct of weariness
which in praxi continually tries to reach back to the eighteenth century? (– for
example as romanticism of feeling, as altruism and hyper-sentimentality, as
feminism in taste, as Socialism in politics). Is the nineteenth century, especially in
its closing decades, not merely a strengthened, brutalized eighteenth century, that is
to say a century of décadence? So that Goethe would have been, not merely for
Germany but for all Europe, merely an episode, a beautiful ‘in vain’? – But one
misunderstands great human beings if one views them from the paltry perspective of
public utility. That one does not know how to make any use of it perhaps even

pertains to greatness…

51
Goethe is the last German before whom I feel reverence: he would have felt three
things which I feel – we are also in agreement over the ‘Cross’.* I am often asked
why it is I write in German: nowhere am I worse read than in the Fatherland. But
who knows, after all, whether I even wish to be read today? – To create things upon
which time tries its teeth in vain; in form and in substance to strive after a little
immortality – I have never been modest enough to demand less of myself. The
aphorism, the apophthegm, in which I am the first master among Germans, are the
forms of ‘eternity’; my ambition is to say in ten sentences what everyone else says
in a book – what everyone else does not say in a book…. I have given mankind the
profoundest book it possesses, my Zarathustra: I shall shortly give it the most
independent.† –

What I Owe to the Ancients
1
In conclusion, a word on that world into which I have sought to find a way, into
which I have perhaps found a new way – the ancient world. My taste, which may be
called the opposite of a tolerant taste, is even here far from uttering a wholesale
Yes: in general it dislikes saying Yes, it would rather say No, most of all it prefers
to say nothing at all…. This applies to entire cultures, it applies to books – it also
applies to towns and countrysides. It is really only quite a small number of books of
antiquity which count for anything in my life; the most famous are not among them.
My sense of style, of the epigram as style, was awoken almost instantaneously on
coming into contact with Sallust. I have not forgotten the astonishment of my
honoured teacher Corssen when he had to give top marks to his worst Latin scholar
– I had done all in a single blow. Compact, severe, with as much substance as
possible, a cold malice towards ‘fine words’, also towards ‘fine feelings’ – in that I
knew myself. One will recognize in my writings, even in my Zarathustra, a very
serious ambition for Roman style, for the ‘aera perennius’* in style. – I had the
same experience on first coming into contact with Horace. From that day to this no
poet has given me the same artistic delight as I derived from the very first from an
Horatian ode. In certain languages what is achieved here is not even desirable. This
mosaic of words in which every word, as sound, as locus, as concept, pours forth its
power to left and right and over the whole, this minimum in the range and number
of signs which achieves a maximum of energy of these signs – all this is Roman
and, if one will believe me, noble par excellence. All other poetry becomes by
comparison somewhat too popular – a mere emotional garrulousness…

2
I received absolutely no such strong impressions from the Greeks; and, not to mince
words, they cannot be to us what the Romans are. One does not learn from the
Greeks – their manner is too strange, it is also too fluid to produce an imperative, a
‘classical’ effect. Who would ever have learned to write from a Greek! Who would
ever have learned it without the Romans!… Let no one offer me Plato as an
objection. In respect to Plato I am a thorough sceptic and have always been unable
to join in the admiration of Plato the artist which is traditional among scholars.
After all, I have here the most refined judges of taste of antiquity themselves on my
side. It seems to me that Plato mixes together all forms of style; he is therewith in
the matter of style a first décadent: he has on his conscience something similar to
the Cynics who devised the Satura Menippea.* For the Platonic dialogue, that

frightfully self-satisfied and childish kind of dialectics, to operate as a stimulus one
must never have read any good French writers – Fontenelle, for example. Plato is
boring. – Ultimately my mistrust of Plato extends to the very bottom of him: I find
him deviated so far from all the fundamental instincts of the Hellenes, so morally
infected, so much an antecedent Christian – he already has the concept ‘good’ as the
supreme concept – that I should prefer to describe the entire phenomenon ‘Plato’ by
the harsh term ‘higher swindle’ or, if you prefer, ‘idealism’, than by any other. It
has cost us dear that this Athenian went to school with the Egyptians (– or with the
Jews in Egypt?…). In the great fatality of Christianity, Plato is that ambiguity and
fascination called the ‘ideal’ which made it possible for the nobler natures of
antiquity to misunderstand themselves and to step on to the bridge which led to the
‘Cross’…. And how much there still is of Plato in the concept ‘Church’, in the
structure, system, practice of the Church! – My recreation, my preference, my cure
from all Platonism has always been Thucydides. Thucydides, and perhaps the
Principe of Machiavelli, are related to me closely by their unconditional will not to
deceive themselves and not to see reason in reality – not in ‘reason’, still less in
‘morality’…. For the deplorable embellishment of the Greeks with the colours of
the ideal which the ‘classically educated’ youth carries away with him into life as
the reward of his grammar-school drilling there is no more radical cure than
Thucydides. One must turn him over line by line and read his hidden thoughts as
clearly as his words: there are few thinkers so rich in hidden thoughts. Sophist
culture, by which I mean realist culture, attains in him its perfect expression – this
invaluable movement in the midst of the morality-and-ideal swindle of the Socratic
schools which was then breaking out everywhere. Greek philosophy as the
décadence of the Greek instinct; Thucydides as the grand summation, the last
manifestation of that strong, stern, hard matter-of-factness instinctive to the older
Hellenes. Courage in face of reality ultimately distinguishes such natures as
Thucydides and Plato: Plato is a coward in face of reality – consequently he flees
into the ideal; Thucydides has himself under control – consequently he retains
control over things…

3
From scenting out ‘beautiful souls’,* ‘golden means’ and other perfections in the
Greeks, from admiring in them such things as their repose in grandeur, their ideal
disposition, their sublime simplicity – from this ‘sublime simplicity’, a niaiserie
allemande† when all is said and done, I was preserved by the psychologist in me. I
saw their strongest instinct, the will to power, I saw them trembling at the
intractable force of this drive – I saw all their institutions evolve out of protective
measures designed for mutual security against the explosive material within them.

The tremendous internal tension then discharged itself in fearful and ruthless
external hostility: the city states tore one another to pieces so that the citizens of
each of them might find peace within himself. One needed to be strong: danger was
close at hand – it lurked everywhere. The splendid supple physique, the reckless
realism and immoralism which pertains to the Hellene was a necessity, not a
‘natural quality’. It was produced, it was not there from the beginning. And one
employed festivals and arts for no other purpose than to feel oneself dominant, to
show oneself dominant: they are means for making oneself feared…. To judge the
Greeks by their philosophers, in the German manner, perchance to employ the
philistinism of the Socratic schools as a clue to what is fundamentally Hellenic!…
But the philosophers are the décadents of Hellenism, the counter-movement against
the old, the noble taste (– against the agonal instinct, against the polis, against the
value of the race, against the authority of tradition). The Socratic virtues were
preached because the Greeks had lost them: excitable, timid, fickle, comedians
every one, they had more than enough reason to let morality be preached to them.
Not that it would have done any good: but big words and fine attitudes are so suited
to décadents…

4
I was the first to take seriously that wonderful phenomenon which bears the name
Dionysos as a means to understanding the older Hellenic instinct, an instinct still
exuberant and even overflowing: it is explicable only as an excess of energy.
Whoever has investigated the Greeks, such as that profoundest student of their
culture now living, Jacob Burckhardt of Basel, realizes at once the value of this line
of approach: Burckhardt inserted a special section on the said phenomenon into his
Culture of the Greeks. For the opposite of this, one should take a look at the almost
laughable poverty of instinct displayed by German philologists whenever they
approach the Dionysian. The celebrated Lobeck especially, who crept into this
world of mysterious states with the honest self-confidence of a dried-up bookworm
and by being nauseously frivolous and childish persuaded himself he was being
scientific – Lobeck intimated, with a great display of erudition, that these curiosities
were of no consequence. To be sure, the priests might have communicated a
number of valuable pieces of information to the participants in such orgies – that
wine arouses desire, for example, that man can live on fruit if need be, that plants
bloom in spring and wither in autumn. As regards that strange wealth of rites,
symbols and myths of orgiastic origin with which the antique world was quite
literally overrun, Lobeck finds in them an occasion for becoming a trifle more
ingenious. ‘When the Greeks had nothing else to do,’ he says (Aglao-phamus I,
672), ‘they used to laugh, jump, race about, or, since man sometimes feels a desire

for this, they used to sit down and weep and wail. Others later came along and
sought some reason for this striking behaviour; and thus those countless myths and
legends arose to explain these practices. On the other hand, one believed that the
droll activities which now took place on festival days necessarily pertained to
festival celebration and retained them as an indispensable part of divine worship.’ –
This is contemptible chatter and no one is likely to take a Lobeck seriously for a
moment. We are affected quite differently when we probe the concept ‘Greek’
which Winckelmann and Goethe constructed for themselves and find it
incompatible with that element out of which Dionysian art evolved – the orgy. I
have, in fact, no doubt that Goethe would have utterly excluded anything of this
kind from the possibilities of the Greek soul. Consequently Goethe did not
understand the Greeks. For it is only in the Dionysian mysteries, in the psychology
of the Dionysian condition, that the fundamental fact of the Hellenic instinct
expresses itself – its ‘will to life’. What did the Hellene guarantee to himself with
these mysteries? Eternal life, the eternal recurrence of life; the future promised and
consecrated in the past; the triumphant Yes to life beyond death and change; true
life as collective continuation of life through procreation, through the mysteries of
sexuality. It was for this reason that the sexual symbol was to the Greeks the
symbol venerable as such, the intrinsic profound meaning of all antique piety. Every
individual detail in the act of procreation, pregnancy, birth, awoke the most exalted
and solemn feelings. In the teachings of the mysteries, pain is sanctified: the ‘pains
of childbirth’ sanctify pain in general – all becoming and growing, all that
guarantees the future, postulates pain…. For the eternal joy in creating to exist, for
the will to life eternally to affirm itself, the ‘torment of childbirth’ must also exist
eternally…. All this is contained in the word Dionysos: I know of no more exalted
symbolism than this Greek symbolism, the symbolism of the Dionysian. The
profoundest instinct of life, the instinct for the future of life, for the eternity of life,
is in this word experienced religiously – the actual road to life, procreation, as the
sacred road.… It was only Christianity, with ressentiment against life in its
foundations, which made of sexuality something impure: it threw filth on the
beginning, on the prerequisite of our life…

5
The psychology of the orgy as an overflowing feeling of life and energy within
which even pain acts as a stimulus provided me with the key to the concept of the
tragic feeling, which was misunderstood as much by Aristotle as it especially was
by our pessimists. Tragedy is so far from providing evidence for pessimism among
the Hellenes in Schopenhauer’s sense that it has to be considered the decisive
repudiation of that idea and the counter-verdict to it. Affirmation of life even in its

strangest and sternest problems, the will to life rejoicing in its own inexhaustibility
through the sacrifice of its highest types – that is what I called Dionysian, that is
what I recognized as the bridge to the psychology of the tragic poet. Not so as to
get rid of pity and terror, not so as to purify oneself of a dangerous emotion through
its vehement discharge – it was thus Aristotle understood it – : but, beyond pity and
terror, to realize in oneself the eternal joy of becoming – that joy which also
encompasses joy in destruction…. And with that I again return to the place from
which I set out – Birth of Tragedy was my first revaluation of all values: with that I
again plant myself in the soil out of which I draw all that I will and can – I, the last
disciple of the philosopher Dionysos – I, the teacher of the eternal recurrence…*

The Hammer Speaks
‘Why so hard?’ the charcoal once said to the diamond; ‘for are we not close
relations?’
Why so soft? O my brothers, thus I ask you: for are you not – my brothers?
Why so soft, unresisting and yielding? Why is there so much denial and
abnegation in your hearts? So little fate in your glances?
And if you will not be fates, if you will not be inexorable: how can you – conquer
with me?
And if your hardness will not flash and cut and cut to pieces: how can you one
day – create with me?
For all creators are hard. And it must seem bliss to you to press your hand upon
millennia as upon wax,
bliss to write upon the will of millennia as upon metal – harder than metal,
nobler than metal. Only the noblest is perfectly hard.
This new law-table do I put over you, O my brothers: Become hard!*

THE ANTI-CHRIST

Foreword
This book belongs to the very few. Perhaps none of them is even living yet.
Possibly they are the readers who understand my Zarathustra: how could I
confound myself with those for whom there are ears listening today? – Only the day
after tomorrow belongs to me. Some are born posthumously.
The conditions under which one understands me and then necessarily understands
– I know them all too well. One must be honest in intellectual matters to the point
of harshness to so much as endure my seriousness, my passion. One must be
accustomed to living on mountains – to seeing the wretched ephemeral chatter of
politics and national egoism beneath one. One must have become indifferent, one
must never ask whether truth is useful or a fatality…. Strength which prefers
questions for which no one today is sufficiently daring; courage for the forbidden;
predestination for the labyrinth. An experience out of seven solitudes. New ears for
new music. New eyes for the most distant things. A new conscience for truths
which have hitherto remained dumb. And the will to economy in the grand style: to
keeping one’s energy, one’s enthusiasm in bounds…. Reverence for oneself; love
for oneself; unconditional freedom with respect to oneself…
Very well! These alone are my readers, my rightful readers, my predestined
readers: what do the rest matter? – The rest are merely mankind. – One must be
superior to mankind in force, in loftiness of soul – in contempt…
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

1
– Let us look one another in the face. We are Hyperboreans* – we know well
enough how much out of the way we live. ‘Neither by land nor by sea shalt thou
find the road to the Hyperboreans’: Pindar already knew that of us. Beyond the
North, beyond the ice, beyond death – our life, our happiness…. We have
discovered happiness, we know the road, we have found the exit out of whole
millennia of labyrinth. Who else has found it? – Modern man perhaps? – ‘I know
not which way to turn; I am everything that knows not which way to turn’ – sighs
modern man…. It was from this modernity that we were ill – from lazy peace, from
cowardly compromise, from the whole virtuous uncleanliness of modern Yes and
No. This tolerance and largeur of heart which ‘forgives’ everything because it
‘Understands’ everything is sirocco to us. Better to live among ice than among
modern virtues and other south winds!… We were brave enough, we spared neither
ourselves nor others: but for long we did not know where to apply our courage. We
became gloomy, we were called fatalists. Our fatality – was the plenitude, the
tension, the blocking-up of our forces. We thirsted for lightning and action, of all
things we kept ourselves furthest from the happiness of the weaklings, from
‘resignation’…. There was a thunderstorm in our air, the nature which we are grew
dark – for we had no road. Formula of our happiness: a Yes, a No, a straight line, a
goal…

2
What is good? – All that heightens the feeling of power, the will to power, power
itself in man.
What is bad? – All that proceeds from weakness.
What is happiness? – The feeling that power increases – that a resistance is
overcome.
Not contentment, but more power; not peace at all, but war; not virtue, but
proficiency (virtue in the Renaissance style, virtù, virtue free of moralic acid).
The weak and ill-constituted shall perish: first principle of our philanthropy. And
one shall help them to do so.
What is more harmful than any vice? – Active sympathy for the ill-constituted
and weak – Christianity…

3
The problem I raise here is not what ought to succeed mankind in the sequence of

species (– the human being is a conclusion –): but what type of human being one
ought to breed, ought to will, as more valuable, more worthy of life, more certain of
the future.
This more valuable type has existed often enough already: but as a lucky
accident, as an exception, never as willed. He has rather been the most feared, he
has hitherto been virtually the thing to be feared – and out of fear the reverse type
has been willed, bred, achieved: the domestic animal, the herd animal, the sick
animal man – the Christian…

4
Mankind does not represent a development of the better or the stronger or the higher
in the way that is believed today. ‘Progress’ is merely a modern idea, that is to say a
false idea. The European of today is of far less value than the European of the
Renaissance; onward development is not by any means, by any necessity the same
thing as elevation, advance, strengthening.
In another sense there are cases of individual success constantly appearing in the
most various parts of the earth and from the most various cultures in which a higher
type does manifest itself: something which in relation to collective mankind is a sort
of superman. Such chance occurrences of great success have always been possible
and perhaps always will be possible. And even entire races, tribes, nations can
under certain circumstances represent such a lucky hit.

5
One should not embellish or dress up Christianity: it has waged a war to the death
against this higher type of man, it has excommunicated all the fundamental instincts
of this type, it has distilled evil, the Evil One, out of these instincts – the strong
human being as the type of reprehensibility, as the ‘outcast’. Christianity has taken
the side of everything weak, base, ill-constituted, it has made an ideal out of
opposition to the preservative instincts of strong life; it has depraved the reason
even of the intellectually strongest natures by teaching men to feel the supreme
values of intellectuality as sinful, as misleading, as temptations. The most
deplorable example: the depraving of Pascal, who believed his reason had been
depraved by original sin while it had only been depraved by his Christianity! –

6
It is a painful, a dreadful spectacle which has opened up before me: I have drawn
back the curtain on the depravity of man. In my mouth this word is protected
against at any rate one suspicion: that it contains a moral accusation of man. It is – I

should like to underline the fact again – free of any moralic acid: and this to the
extent that I find that depravity precisely where hitherto one most consciously
aspired to ‘virtue’, to ‘divinity’. I understand depravity, as will already have been
guessed, in the sense of décadence: my assertion is that all the values in which
mankind at present summarizes its highest desideratum are décadence values.
I call an animal, a species, an individual depraved when it loses its instincts,
when it chooses, when it prefers what is harmful to it. A history of the ‘higher
feelings’, of the ‘ideals of mankind’ – and it is possible I shall have to narrate it –
would almost also constitute an explanation of why man is so depraved. I consider
life itself instinct for growth, for continuance, for accumulation of forces, for
power: where the will to power is lacking there is decline. My assertion is that this
will is lacking in all the supreme values of mankind – that values of decline,
nihilistic values hold sway under the holiest names.

7
Christianity is called the religion of pity. – Pity stands in antithesis to the tonic
emotions which enhance the energy of the feeling of life: it has a depressive effect.
One loses force when one pities. The loss of force which life has already sustained
through suffering is increased and multiplied even further by pity. Suffering itself
becomes contagious through pity; sometimes it can bring about a collective loss of
life and life-energy which stands in an absurd relation to the quantum of its cause (–
the case of the death of the Nazarene). This is the first aspect; but there is an even
more important one. If one judges pity by the value of the reactions which it usually
brings about, its mortally dangerous character appears in a much clearer light. Pity
on the whole thwarts the law of evolution, which is the law of selection. It preserves
what is ripe for destruction; it defends life’s disinherited and condemned; through
the abundance of the ill-constituted of all kinds which it retains in life it gives life
itself a gloomy and questionable aspect. One has ventured to call pity a virtue (– in
every noble morality it counts as weakness –); one has gone further, one has made
of it the virtue, the ground and origin of all virtue – only, to be sure, from the
viewpoint of a nihilistic philosophy which inscribed Denial of Life on its escutcheon
– a fact always to be kept in view. Schopenhauer was within his rights in this: life is
denied, made more worthy of denial by pity – pity is practical nihilism. To say it
again, this depressive and contagious instinct thwarts those instincts bent on
preserving and enhancing the value of life: both as a multiplier of misery and as a
conservator of everything miserable it is one of the chief instruments for the
advancement of décadence – pity persuades to nothingness!… One does not say
‘nothingness’: one says ‘the Beyond’; or ‘God’; or ‘true life’; or Nirvana,
redemption, blessedness…. This innocent rhetoric from the domain of religio-moral

idiosyncrasy at once appears much less innocent when one grasps which tendency is
here draping the mantle of sublime words about itself: the tendency hostile to life.
Schopenhauer was hostile to life: therefore pity became for him a virtue….
Aristotle, as is well known, saw in pity a morbid and dangerous condition which
one did well to get at from time to time with a purgative: he understood tragedy as a
purgative. From the instinct for life one would indeed have to seek some means of
puncturing so morbid and dangerous an accumulation of pity as that represented by
the case of Schopenhauer (and unfortunately also by our entire literary and artistic
décadence from St Petersburg to Paris, from Tolstoy to Wagner), so that it might
burst…. Nothing in our unhealthy modernity is more unhealthy than Christian pity.
To be physician here, to be inexorable here, to wield the knife here – that pertains
to us, that is our kind of philanthropy, with that are we philosophers, we
Hyperboreans! –

8
It is necessary to say whom we feel to be our antithesis – the theologians and all that
has theologian blood in its veins – our entire philosophy.… One must have seen the
fatality from close up, better still one must have experienced it in oneself, one must
have almost perished by it, no longer to find anything funny here (the free-thinking
of our naturalists and physiologists is to my mind funny – they lack passion in these
things, they do not suffer from them –). That poison extends much further than one
thinks: I have discovered the arrogant theologian-instinct wherever anyone today
feels himself to be an ‘idealist’ – wherever anyone assumes, by virtue of a higher
origin, a right to cast strange and superior looks at actuality.… Just like the priest,
the idealist has all the great concepts in his hand (– and not only in his hand!), he
plays them out with a benevolent contempt against the ‘understanding’, the ‘senses’,
‘honours’, ‘luxury’, ‘science’, he sees these things as beneath him, as harmful and
seductive forces above which ‘the spirit’ soars in pure self-sufficiency – as though
humility, chastity, poverty, in a word holiness, had not hitherto done life
unutterably more harm than any sort of frightfulness or vice whatever.… Pure spirit
is pure lie.… So long as the priest, that denier, calumniator and poisoner of life by
profession, still counts as a higher kind of human being, there can be no answer to
the question: what is truth? One has already stood truth on its head when the
conscious advocate of denial and nothingness counts as the representative of
‘truth’…

9
I make war on this theologian instinct: I have found traces of it everywhere.
Whoever has theologian blood in his veins has a wrong and dishonest attitude

towards all things from the very first. The pathos that develops out of this is called
faith: closing one’s eyes with respect to oneself for good and all so as not to suffer
from the sight of incurable falsity. Out of this erroneous perspective on all things
one makes a morality, a virtue, a holiness for oneself, one unites the good
conscience with seeing falsely – one demands that no other kind of perspective shall
be accorded any value after one has rendered one’s own sacrosanct with the names
‘God’, ‘redemption’, ‘eternity’. I have dug out the theologian instinct everywhere: it
is the most widespread, peculiarly subterranean form of falsity that exists on earth.
What a theologian feels to be true must be false: this provides almost a criterion of
truth. It is his deepest instinct of self-preservation which forbids any part of reality
whatever to be held in esteem or even spoken of. Wherever the influence of the
theologian extends value judgement is stood on its head, the concepts ‘true’ and
‘false’ are necessarily reversed: that which is most harmful to life is here called
‘true’, that which enhances, intensifies, affirms, justifies it and causes it to triumph
is called ‘false’.… If it happens that, by way of the ‘conscience’ of princes (or of
nations –), theologians stretch out their hands after power, let us be in no doubt
what at bottom is taking place every time: the will to the end, the nihilistic will
wants power…

10
Among Germans one will understand immediately when I say that philosophy has
been corrupted by theologian blood. The Protestant pastor is the grandfather of
German philosophy, Protestantism itself is its peccatum originale.* Definition of
Protestantism: the half-sided paralysis of Christianity – and of reason.… One has
only to say the words ‘College of Tübingen’† to grasp what German philosophy is
at bottom – a cunning theology.… The Swabians are the best liars in Germany, they
lie innocently.… Why the rejoicing heard throughout the German academic world –
three-quarters composed of the sons of pastors and teachers – at the appearance of
Kant? Why the Germans’ conviction, which still finds an echo even today, that with
Kant things were taking a turn for the better? The theologian instinct in the German
scholar divined what was henceforth possible once again.… A secret path to the old
ideal stood revealed, the concept ‘real world’, the concept of morality as the essence
of the world (– these two most vicious errors in existence!) were once more, thanks
to a crafty-sly scepticism, if not demonstrable yet no longer refutable.… Reason,
the right of reason does not extend so far.… One had made of reality an
‘appearance’; one had made a completely fabricated world, that of being, into
reality.… Kant’s success is merely a theologian’s success: German integrity was far
from firm and Kant, like Luther, like Leibniz, was one more constraint upon it…

11

A word against Kant as moralist. A virtue has to be our invention, our most
personal defence and necessity: in any other sense it is merely a danger. What does
not condition our life harms it: a virtue merely from a feeling of respect for the
concept ‘virtue’, as Kant desired it, is harmful. ‘Virtue’, ‘duty’, ‘good in itself’,
impersonal and universal – phantoms, expressions of decline, of the final exhaustion
of life, of Kônigsbergian Chinadom. The profoundest laws of preservation and
growth demand the reverse of this: that each one of us should devise his own virtue,
his own categorical imperative. A people perishes if it mistakes its own duty for the
concept of duty in general. Nothing works more profound ruin than any
‘impersonal’ duty, any sacrifice to the Moloch of abstraction. – Kant’s categorical
imperative* should have been felt as mortally dangerous!… The theologian instinct
alone took it under its protection! – An action compelled by the instinct of life has
in the joy of performing it the proof it is a right action: and that nihilist with
Christian-dogmatic bowels understands joy as an objection.… What destroys more
quickly than to work, to think, to feel without inner necessity, without a deep
personal choice, without joy? as an automaton of ‘duty’? It is virtually a recipe for
décadence, even for idiocy.… Kant became an idiot. – And that was the
contemporary of Goethe! This fatal spider counted as the German philosopher – still
does! I take care not to say what I think of the Germans.… Did Kant not see in the
French Revolution the transition from the inorganic form of the state to the organic?
Did he not ask himself whether there was an event which could be explained in no
other way than by a moral predisposition on the part of mankind, so that with it the
‘tendency of man to seek the good’ would be proved once and for all? Kant’s
answer: ‘The Revolution is that.’ The erring instinct in all and everything, antinaturalness as instinct, German décadence as philosophy – that is Kant! –

12
I exclude a few sceptics, the decent type in the history of philosophy: but the rest
are ignorant of the first requirements of intellectual integrity. These great visionaries
and prodigies behave one and all like little women – they consider ‘fine feelings’
arguments, the ‘heaving bosom’ the bellows of divinity, conviction the criterion of
truth. Finally Kant, in his ‘German’ innocence, tried to give this form of corruption,
this lack of intellectual conscience, a scientific colouring with the concept ‘practical
reason’: he designed a reason specifically for the case in which one was supposed
not to have to bother about reason, namely when morality, when the sublime
demand ‘thou shalt’ makes itself heard. If one considers that the philosopher is, in
virtually all nations, only the further development of the priestly type, one is no
longer surprised to discover this heirloom of the priest, self-deceptive fraudulence.
If one has sacred tasks, for example that of improving, saving, redeeming mankind

– if one carries the divinity in one’s bosom, is the mouthpiece of an other-world
imperative, such a mission already places one outside all merely reasonable
valuations – one is already sanctified by such a task, one is already the type of a
higher order!… What does a priest care about science! He is above it! – And the
priest has hitherto ruled! – He has determined the concept ‘true’ and ‘untrue’!…

13
Let us not undervalue this: we ourselves, we free spirits, are already a ‘revaluation
of all values’, an incarnate declaration of war and victory over all ancient
conceptions of ‘true’ and ‘untrue’. The most valuable insights are the last to be
discovered; but the most valuable insights are methods. All the methods, all the
prerequisites of our present-day scientificality have for millennia been the objects of
the profoundest contempt: on their account one was excluded from associating with
‘honest’ men – one was considered an ‘enemy of God’, a despiser of truth, a man
‘possessed’. As a practitioner of science one was Chandala.… We have had the
whole pathos of mankind against us – its conception of what truth ought to be;
every ‘thou shalt’ has hitherto been directed against us.… Our objectives, our
practices, our quiet, cautious, mistrustful manner – all this appeared utterly
unworthy and contemptible to mankind. – In the end one might reasonably ask
oneself whether it was not really an aesthetic taste which blinded mankind for so
long: it desired a picturesque effect from truth, it desired especially that the man of
knowledge should produce a powerful impression on the senses. It was our modesty
which offended their taste the longest.… Oh, how well they divined that fact, those
turkey-cocks of God –

14
We have learned better. We have become more modest in every respect. We no
longer trace the origin of man in the ‘spirit’, in the ‘divinity’, we have placed him
back among the animals. We consider him the strongest animal because he is the
most cunning: his spirituality is a consequence of this. On the other hand, we guard
ourselves against a vanity which would like to find expression even here: the vanity
that man is the great secret objective of animal evolution. Man is absolutely not the
crown of creation: every creature stands beside him at the same stage of perfection.
… And even in asserting that we assert too much: man is, relatively speaking, the
most unsuccessful animal, the sickliest, the one most dangerously strayed from its
instincts – with all that, to be sure, the most interesting! – As regards the animals,
Descartes was the first who, with a boldness worthy of reverence, ventured to think
of the animal as a machine: our whole science of physiology is devoted to proving
this proposition. Nor, logically, do we exclude man, as even Descartes did: our

knowledge of man today is real knowledge precisely to the extent that it is
knowledge of him as a machine. Formerly man was presented with ‘free will’ as a
dowry from a higher order: today we have taken even will away from him, in the
sense that will may no longer be understood as a faculty. The old word ‘will’ only
serves to designate a resultant, a kind of individual reaction which necessarily
follows a host of partly contradictory, partly congruous stimuli – the will no longer
‘effects’ anything, no longer ‘moves’ anything.… Formerly one saw in man’s
consciousness, in his ‘spirit’, the proof of his higher origin, his divinity; to make
himself perfect man was advised to draw his senses back into himself in the manner
of the tortoise, to cease to have any traffic with the earthly, to lay aside his mortal
frame: then the chief part of him would remain behind, ‘pure spirit’. We have
thought better of this too: becoming-conscious, ‘spirit’, is to us precisely a symptom
of a relative imperfection of the organism, as an attempting, fumbling, blundering,
as a toiling in which an unnecessarily large amount of nervous energy is expended –
we deny that anything can be made perfect so long as it is still made conscious.
‘Pure spirit’ is pure stupidity: if we deduct the nervous system and the senses, the
‘mortal frame’, we miscalculate – that’s all!…

15
In Christianity neither morality nor religion come into contact with reality at any
point. Nothing but imaginary causes (‘God’, ‘soul’, ‘ego’, ‘spirit’, ‘free will’ – or
‘unfree will’): nothing but imaginary effects (‘sin’, ‘redemption’, ‘grace’,
‘punishment’, ‘forgiveness of sins’). A traffic between imaginary beings (‘God’,
‘spirits’, ‘souls’); an imaginary natural science (anthropocentric; complete lack of
the concept of natural causes); an imaginary psychology (nothing but selfmisunderstandings, interpretations of pleasant or unpleasant general feelings, for
example the condition of the nervus sympathicus, with the aid of the sign-language
of religio-moral idiosyncrasy – ‘repentance’, ‘sting of conscience’, ‘temptation by
the Devil’, ‘the proximity of God’); an imaginary teleology (‘the kingdom of God’,
‘the Last Judgement’, ‘eternal life’). – This purely fictitious world is distinguished
from the world of dreams, very much to its disadvantage, by the fact that the latter
mirrors actuality, while the former falsifies, disvalues and denies actuality. Once
the concept ‘nature’ had been devised as the concept antithetical to ‘God’, ‘natural’
had to be the word for ‘reprehensible’ – this entire fictional world has its roots in
hatred of the natural (– actuality! –), it is the expression of a profound discontent
with the actual.… But that explains everything. Who alone has reason to lie himself
out of actuality? He who suffers from it. But to suffer from actuality means to be an
abortive actuality.… The preponderance of feelings of displeasure over feelings of
pleasure is the cause of a fictitious morality and religion: such a preponderance,

however, provides the formula for décadence…

16
A critical examination of the Christian concept of God invites a similar conclusion.
– A people which still believes in itself still also has its own God. In him it
venerates the conditions through which it has prospered, its virtues – it projects its
joy in itself, its feeling of power on to a being whom one can thank for them. He
who is rich wants to bestow; a proud people needs a God in order to sacrifice.…
With in the bounds of such presuppositions religion is a form of gratitude. One is
grateful for oneself: for that one needs a God. – Such a God must be able to be both
useful and harmful, both friend and foe – he is admired in good and bad alike. The
anti-natural castration of a God into a God of the merely good would be totally
undesirable here. One has as much need of the evil God as of the good God: for one
does not owe one’s existence to philanthropy or tolerance precisely.… Of what
consequence would a God be who knew nothing of anger, revengefulness, envy,
mockery, cunning, acts of violence? To whom even the rapturous ardeurs of victory
and destruction were unknown? One would not understand such a God: why should
one have him? – To be sure: when a people is perishing; when it feels its faith in the
future, its hope of freedom vanish completely; when it becomes conscious that the
most profitable thing of all is submissiveness and that the virtues of submissiveness
are a condition of its survival, then its God has to alter too. He now becomes a
dissembler, timid, modest, counsels ‘peace of soul’, no more hatred, forbearance,
‘love’ even towards friend and foe. He is continually moralizing, he creeps into the
cave of every private virtue, becomes a God for everybody, becomes a private man,
becomes a cosmopolitan.… Formerly he represented a people, the strength of a
people, everything aggressive and thirsting for power in the soul of a people: now
he is merely the good God.… There is in fact no other alternative for Gods: either
they are the will to power – and so long as they are that they will be national Gods
– or else the impotence for power – and then they necessarily become good…

17
Wherever the will to power declines in any form there is every time also a
physiological regression, a décadence. The divinity of décadence, pruned of all its
manliest drives and virtues, from now on necessarily becomes the God of the
physiologically retarded, the weak. They do not call themselves the weak, they call
themselves ‘the good’.… One will understand without further indication at what
moment of history the dual fiction of a good and an evil God first becomes possible.
The same instinct which makes the subjugated people reduce its God to the ‘good in
itself makes them expunge the good qualities from the God of their conqueror; they

revenge themselves on their masters by changing their masters’ God into a devil. –
The good God and the Devil: both products of décadence. – How can one today still
defer so far to the simplicity of Christian theologians as to join them in proclaiming
that the evolution of the concept of God from the ‘God of Israel’, the national God,
to the Christian God, the epitome of everything good, is an advance? – But even
Renan does so. As if Renan had a right to simplicity! For it is the opposite which
leaps to the eye. When the prerequisites of ascending life, when everything strong,
brave, masterful, proud is eliminated from the concept of God; when he declines
step by step to the symbol of a staff for the weary, a sheet-anchor for all who are
drowning; when he becomes the poor people’s God, the sinner’s God, the God of
the sick par excellence, and the predicate ‘saviour’, ‘redeemer’ as it were remains
over as the predicate of divinity as such: of what does such a transformation speak?
such a reduction of the divine? – To be sure: ‘the kingdom of God’ has thereby
grown larger. Formerly he had only his people, his ‘chosen’ people. In the
meantime, just like his people itself, he has gone abroad, gone wandering about;
since then he has sat still nowhere: until at last he is at home everywhere, the great
cosmopolitan – until he has got ‘the great majority’ and half the earth on his side.
But the God of the ‘great majority’, the democrat among Gods, has none the less
not become a proud pagan God: he has remained a Jew, he has remained the God of
the nook, the God of all the dark corners and places, of all unhealthy quarters
throughout the world!… His world-empire is as before an underworld-empire, a
hospital, a souterrain-empire, a ghetto-empire.… And he himself so pale, so weak,
so décadent.… Even the palest of the pale have still been able to master him,
messieurs the metaphysicians, the conceptual albinos. These have spun their web
around him so long that, hypnotized by their movements, he himself became a
spider, a metaphysician. Thence forward he span the world again out of himself –
sub specie Spinozae – thenceforward he transformed himself into something ever
paler and less substantial, became an ‘ideal’, became ‘pure spirit’, became
‘absolutum’, became ‘thing in itself.… Decay of a God: God became ‘thing in
itself’…

18
The Christian conception of God – God as God of the sick, God as spider, God as
spirit – is one of the most corrupt conceptions of God arrived at on earth: perhaps it
even represents the low-water mark in the descending development of the God type.
God degenerated to the contradiction of life, instead of being its transfiguration and
eternal Yes! In God a declaration of hostility towards life, nature, the will to life!
God the formula for every calumny of ‘this world’, for every lie about ‘the next
world’! In God nothingness deified, the will to nothingness sanctified!…

19
That the strong races of northern Europe have not repudiated the Christian God
certainly reflects no credit on their talent for religion – not to speak of their taste.
They ought to have felt compelled to have done with such a sickly and decrepit
product of décadence. But there lies a curse on them for not having had done with
it: they have taken up sickness, old age, contradiction into all their instincts – since
then they have failed to create a God! Almost two millennia and not a single new
God! But still, and as if existing by right, like an ultimate and maximum of the
God-creating force, of the creator spiritus in man, this pitiable God of Christian
monotono-theism! This hybrid of the void, conceptualism and contradiction, this
picture of decay, in which all décadence instincts, all cowardliness and weariness of
soul have their sanction! –

20
With my condemnation of Christianity, I should not like to have wronged a kindred
religion which even preponderates in the number of its believers: Buddhism. They
belong together as nihilistic religions – they are décadence religions – but they are
distinguished from one another in the most remarkable way. The critic of
Christianity is profoundly grateful to Indian scholars that one is now able to
compare these two religions. – Buddhism is a hundred times more realistic than
Christianity – it has the heritage of a cool and objective posing of problems in its
composition, it arrives after a philosophical movement lasting hundreds of years;
the concept ‘God’ is already abolished by the time it arrives. Buddhism is the only
really positivistic religion history has to show us, even in its epistemology (a strict
phenomenalism –), it no longer speaks of ‘the struggle against sin’ but, quite in
accordance with actuality, ‘the struggle against suffering’. It already has – and this
distinguishes it profoundly from Christianity – the self-deception of moral concepts
behind it – it stands, in my language, beyond good and evil. – The two
physiological facts upon which it rests and on which it fixes its eyes are: firstly an
excessive excitability of sensibility which expresses itself as a refined capacity for
pain, then an over-intellectuality, a too great preoccupation with concepts and
logical procedures under which the personal instinct has sustained harm to the
advantage of the ‘impersonal’ (– both of them conditions which at any rate some of
my readers, the objective ones, will know from experience, as I do). On the basis of
these physiological conditions a state of depression has arisen: against this
depression Buddha takes hygienic measures. He opposes it with life in the open air,
the wandering life; with moderation and fastidiousness as regards food; with caution
towards all emotions which produce gall, which heat the blood; no anxiety, either
for oneself or for others. He demands ideas which produce repose or cheerfulness –

he devises means for disaccustoming oneself to others. He understands
benevolence, being kind, as health-promoting. Prayer is excluded, as is asceticism;
no categorical imperative, no compulsion at all, not even with in the monastic
community (– one can leave it –). All these would have the effect of increasing that
excessive excitability. For this reason too he demands no struggle against those who
think differently; his teaching resists nothing more than it resists the feeling of
revengefulness, of antipathy, of ressentiment (– ‘enmity is not ended by enmity’:
the moving refrain of the whole of Buddhism…). And quite rightly: it is precisely
these emotions which would be thoroughly unhealthy with regard to the main
dietetic objective. The spiritual weariness he discovered and which expressed itself
as an excessive ‘objectivity’ (that is to say weakening of individual interest, loss of
centre of gravity, of ‘egoism’), he combated by directing even the spiritual interests
back to the individual person. In the teaching of Buddha egoism becomes a duty:
the ‘one thing needful’, the ‘how can you get rid of suffering’ regulates and
circumscribes the entire spiritual diet (– one may perhaps call to mind that Athenian
who likewise made war on pure ‘scienctificality’, Socrates, who elevated personal
egoism to morality even in the domain of problems).

21
The precondition for Buddhism is a very mild climate, very gentle and liberal
customs, no militarism; and that it is the higher and even learned classes in which
the movement has its home. The supreme goal is cheerfulness, stillness, absence of
desire, and this goal is achieved. Buddhism is not a religion in which one merely
aspires after perfection: perfection is the normal case. –
In Christianity the instincts of the subjugated and oppressed come into the
foreground: it is the lowest classes which seek their salvation in it. Here the
casuistic business of sin, self-criticism, conscience-inquisition is practised as a
specific against boredom; here an emotional attitude towards a power, called ‘God’,
is kept constantly alive (through prayer); here the highest things are considered
unachievable, gifts, ‘grace’. Here public openness is also lacking; the hole-andcorner, the dark chamber is Christian. Here the body is despised, hygiene repudiated
as sensuality; the Church even resists cleanliness (– the first measure taken by the
Christians after the expulsion of the Moors was the closure of the public baths, of
which Cordova alone possessed 270). A certain sense of cruelty towards oneself and
others is Christian; hatred of those who think differently; the will to persecute.
Gloomy and exciting ideas stand in the foreground; the states most highly desired
and designated by the highest names are epileptoid states; diet is selected so as to
encourage morbid phenomena and to over-excite the nerves. Mortal hostility against
the masters of the earth, against the ‘noble’ – and at the same time a covert secret

competition (– one allows them the ‘body’, one wants only the ‘soul’): that is also
Christian. Hatred of mind, of pride, courage, freedom, libertinage of mind is
Christian; hatred of the senses, of the joy of the senses, of joy in general is
Christian…

22
When it left its original home, the lowest orders, the underworld of the ancient
world, when it went in search of power among barbarian peoples, Christianity had
no longer to presuppose weary human beings but inwardly savage and selflacerating ones – strong but ill-constituted human beings. Here discontentedness
with oneself, suffering from oneself is not, as it is with the Buddhists, an
immoderate excitability and capacity for pain, but on the contrary an overwhelming
desire to do harm, to discharge an inner tension in hostile actions and ideas. To
dominate barbarians Christianity had need of barbarous concepts and values:
sacrifice of the first-born, blood-drinking at communion, contempt for intellect and
culture; torture in all its forms, physical and non-physical; great pomp brought to
public worship. Buddhism is a religion for late human beings, for races grown
kindly, gentle, over-intellectual who feel pain too easily (– Europe is not nearly ripe
for it –): it leads them back to peace and cheerfulness, to an ordered diet in
intellectual things, to a certain physical hardening. Christianity desires to dominate
beasts of prey; its means for doing so is to make them sick – weakening is the
Christian recipe for taming, for ‘civilization’. Buddhism is a religion for the end and
fatigue of a civilization, Christianity does not even find civilization in existence – it
establishes civilization if need be.

23
Buddhism, to say it again, is a hundred times colder, more veracious, more
objective. It no longer needs to make its suffering and capacity for pain decent to
itself by interpreting it as sin – it merely says what it feels: ‘I suffer’. To the
barbarian, on the contrary, suffering in itself is not decent: he first requires it to be
interpreted before he will admit to himself that he suffers (his instinct directs him
rather to deny he is suffering, to a silent endurance). Here the word ‘Devil’ was a
blessing: one had an overwhelming and fearful enemy – one did not need to be
ashamed of suffering at the hands of such an.enemy. –
Christianity has a number of subtleties in its foundations which belong to the
Orient. Above all, it knows that it is in itself a matter of absolute indifference
whether a thing be true, but a matter of the highest importance to what extent it is
believed to be true. Truth and the belief that something is true: two completely
diverse worlds of interest, almost antithetical worlds – one gets to them by

fundamentally different roads. To be knowledgeable in this – in the Orient that is
almost enough to constitute a sage: thus the Brahmins* understood it, thus Plato
understands it, thus does every student of esoteric wisdom understand it. If, for
example, there is happiness to be found in believing oneself redeemed from sin, it is
not necessary for a man first to be sinful, but for him to feel himself sinful. If,
however, it is belief as such which is necessary above all else, then one has to bring
reason, knowledge, inquiry into disrepute: the road to truth becomes the forbidden
road. – Intense hope is a much stronger stimulant to life than any single instance of
happiness which actually occurs. Sufferers have to be sustained by a hope which
cannot be refuted by any actuality – which is not done away with by any fulfilment:
a hope in the Beyond. (It was precisely on account of this capacity for keeping the
unhappy in suspense that the Greeks considered hope the evil of evils, the actual
malignant evil: it remained behind in the box of evil.) – So that love shall be
possible, God has to be a person; so that the lowest instincts shall have a voice, God
has to be young. To satisfy the ardour of the women a handsome saint is moved into
the foreground, to satisfy that of the men a Mary. This on the presupposition that
Christianity desires to become master on a soil where the worship of Adonis or
Aphrodite has already determined the concept of what religious worship is. The
requirement of chastity increases the vehemence and inward intensity of the
religious instinct – it renders the cult warmer, more enthusiastic, more soulful. –
Love is the state in which man sees things most of all as they are not. The illusioncreating force is there at its height, likewise the sweetening and transforming force.
One endures more when in love than one otherwise would, one tolerates everything.
The point was to devise a religion in which love is possible: with that one is beyond
the worst that life can offer – one no longer even sees it. – So much for the three
Christian virtues faith, hope and charity:† I call them the three Christian
shrewdnesses. – Buddhism is too late, too positivistic still to be shrewd in this
fashion. –

24
I only touch on the problem of the origin of Christianity here. The first proposition
towards its solution is: Christianity can be understood only by referring to the soil
out of which it grew – it is not a counter-movement against the Jewish instinct, it is
actually its logical consequence, one further conclusion of its fear-inspiring logic. In
the Redeemer’s formula: ‘Salvation is of the Jews’. – The second proposition is: the
psychological type of the Galilean is still recognizable – but only in a completely
degenerate form (which is at once a mutilation and an overloading with foreign
traits) could it serve the end to which it was put, that of being the type of a
redeemer of mankind. –

The Jews are the most remarkable nation of world history because, faced with the
question of being or not being, they preferred, with a perfectly uncanny conviction,
being at any price: the price they had to pay was the radical falsification of all
nature, all naturalness, all reality, the entire inner world as well as the outer. They
defined themselves counter to all those conditions under which a nation was
previously able to live, was permitted to live; they made of themselves an antithesis
to natural conditions – they inverted religion, religious worship, morality, history,
psychology one after the other in an irreparable way into the contradiction of their
natural values. We encounter the same phenomenon again and in unutterably vaster
proportions, although only as a copy – the Christian Church, in contrast to the
‘nation of saints’, renounces all claim to originality. For precisely this reason the
Jews are the most fateful nation in world history; their after-effect has falsified
mankind to such an extent that today the Christian is able to feel anti-Jewish
without realizing he is the ultimate consequence of the Jews.
In my Genealogy of Morals I introduced for the first time the psychology of the
antithetical concepts of a noble morality and a ressentiment morality, the latter
deriving from a denial of the former: but this latter corresponds totally to JudeoChristian morality. To be able to reject all that represents the ascending movement
of life, well-constitutedness, power, beauty, self-affirmation on earth, the instinct of
ressentiment here become genius had to invent another world from which that lifeaffirmation would appear evil, reprehensible as such. Considered psychologically,
the Jewish nation is a nation of the toughest vital energy which, placed in
impossible circumstances, voluntarily, from the profoundest shrewdness in selfpreservation, took the side of all décadence instincts – not as being dominated by
them but because it divined in them a power by means of which one can prevail
against ‘the world’. The Jews are the counterparts of décadents: they have been
compelled to act as décadents to the point of illusion, they have known, with a non
plus ultra of histrionic genius, how to place themselves at the head of all décadence
movements (– as the Christianity of Paul –) so as to make of them something
stronger than any party affirmative of life. For the kind of man who desires to attain
power through Judaism and Christianity, the priestly kind, décadence is only a
means: this kind of man has a life-interest in making mankind sick and in inverting
the concepts ‘good’ and ‘evil’, ‘true’ and ‘false’ in a mortally dangerous and worldcalumniating sense. –

25
The history of Israel is invaluable as a typical history of the denaturalizing of
natural values: I shall indicate five stages in the process. Originally, above all in the
period of the Kingdom, Israel too stood in a correct, that is to say natural

relationship to all things. Their Yaweh was the expression of their consciousness of
power, of their delight in themselves, their hopes of themselves: in him they
anticipated victory and salvation, with him they trusted that nature would provide
what the people needed – above all rain. Yaweh is the God of Israel and
consequently the God of justice: the logic of every nation that is in power and has a
good conscience about it. These two aspects of a nation’s self-affirmation find
expression in festival worship: it is grateful for the great destiny which has raised it
on high, it is grateful towards the year’s seasons and all its good fortune with
livestock and husbandry. – This state of things long remained the ideal, even after it
had been tragically done away with: anarchy with in, the Assyrian from without.
But the people retained as its supreme desideratum that vision of a king who is a
good soldier and an upright judge: as did above all the typical prophet (that is to say
critic and satirist of the hour) Isaiah. – But every hope remained unfulfilled. The old
God could no longer do what he formerly could. One should have let him go. What
happened? One altered the conception of him: at this price one retained him. Yaweh
the God of ‘justice’ – no longer at one with Israel, an expression of national selfconfidence: now only a God bound by conditions. The new conception of him
becomes an instrument in the hands of priestly agitators who henceforth interpret all
good fortune as a reward, all misfortune as punishment for disobedience of God, for
‘sin’: that most mendacious mode of interpretation of a supposed ‘moral worldorder’ through which the natural concept ‘cause’ and ‘effect’ is once and for all
stood on its head. When one has banished natural causality from the world by
means of reward and punishment, one then requires an anti-natural causality: all the
remaining unnaturalness follows forthwith. A God who demands – in place of a
God who helps, who devises means, who is fundamentally a word for every happy
inspiration of courage and self-reliance.… Morality no longer the expression of the
conditions under which a nation lives and grows, no longer a nation’s deepest
instinct of life, but become abstract, become the antithesis of life – morality as a
fundamental degradation of the imagination, as an ‘evil eye’ for all things. What is
Jewish, what is Christian morality? Chance robbed of its innocence; misfortune
dirtied by the concept ‘sin’; well-being as a danger, as ‘temptation’; physiological
indisposition poisoned by the worm of conscience…

26
The concept of God falsified; the concept of morality falsified – the Jewish
priesthood did not stop there. The entire history of Israel was useless: away with it!
– These priests perpetrated that miracle of falsification the documentation of which
lies before us in a good part of the Bible: with unparalleled disdain of every
tradition, every historical reality, they translated their own national past into

religious terms, that is to say they made of it a stupid salvation-mechanism of guilt
towards Yaweh and punishment, piety towards Yaweh and reward. We would feel
this most shameful act of historical falsification much more painfully if millennia of
ecclesiastical interpretation of history had not made us almost oblivious to the
demands of integrity in historicis. And the philosophers have seconded the Church:
the lie of a ‘moral world-order’ permeates the whole evolution even of the most
recent philosophy. What does ‘moral world-order’ mean? That there exists once and
for all a will of God as to what man is to do and what he is not to do; that the value
of a nation, of an individual is to be measured by how much or how little obedience
is accorded the will of God; that the ruling power of the will of God, expressed as
punishment and reward according to the degree of obedience, is demonstrated in the
destiny of a nation, of an individual. – The reality displaced by this pitiable lie is: a
parasitic kind of human being which prospers only at the expense of every healthy
form of life, the priest, abuses the name of God: he calls a state of society in which
the priest determines the value of things ‘the kingdom of God’; he calls the means
by which such a state is achieved or perpetuated ‘the will of God’; with coldblooded cynicism he assesses nations, epochs, individuals according to whether they
were conducive to the rule of priests or whether they resisted it. Observe them at
work: in the hands of the Jewish priests the great epoch in the history of Israel
became an epoch of decay, the Exile, the long years of misfortune, was transformed
into an eternal punishment for the great epoch – an epoch in which the priest was as
yet nothing. According to their requirements they made the mighty, very freely
constituted figures of Israel’s history into either pathetic cringing bigots or ‘godless
men’, they simplified the psychology of every great event into the idiotic formula
‘obedience to or disobedience of God’. – A further step: the ‘will of God’ (that is to
say the conditions for preserving the power of the priest) has to be known – to this
end a ‘revelation’ is required. In plain words: a great literary forgery becomes
necessary, a ‘sacred book’ is discovered – it is made public with all hieratic pomp,
with days of repentance and with lamentation over the long years of ‘sinfulness’.
The ‘will of God’ had been established years before: the whole evil lay in the
nation’s having become estranged from the ‘sacred book’.… The ‘will of God’ had
been revealed already to Moses.… What had happened? The priest had, with
precision and pedantry, right down to the imposts large and small which had to be
paid to him (– not forgetting the tastiest pieces of meat: for the priest is a beefeater), formulated once and for all what he intends to have, ‘what the will of God
is’.… From now on all things of life are so ordered that the priest is everywhere
indispensable; at all the natural events of life, at birth, marriage, sickness, death, not
to speak of ‘sacrifice’ (meal-times), there appears the holy parasite to denaturalize
them – in his language to ‘sanctify’ them.… For one must grasp this: every natural
custom, every natural institution (state, administration of justice, marriage, tending

of the sick and poor), every requirement presented by the instinct for life, in short
everything valuable in itself, becomes utterly valueless, inimical to value through
the parasitism of the priest (or the ‘moral world-order’): a sanction is subsequently
required – a value-bestowing power is needed which denies the natural quality in
these things and only by doing so is able to create a value.… The priest disvalues,
dissanctifies nature: it is only at the price of this that he exists at all. – Disobedience
of God, that is to say of the priest, of ‘the Law’, now acquires the name ‘sin’; the
means of ‘becoming reconciled again with God’ are, as is only to be expected,
means by which subjection to the priest is only more thoroughly guaranteed: the
priest alone ‘redeems’.… From a psychological point of view, ‘sins’ are
indispensable in any society organized by priests: they are the actual levers of
power, the priest lives on sins, he needs ‘the commission of sins’.… Supreme law:
‘God forgives him who repents’ – in plain language: who subjects himself to the
priest. –

27
On a soil falsified in this way, where all nature, all natural value, all reality had the
profoundest instincts of the ruling class against it, there arose Christianity, a form of
mortal hostility to reality as yet unsurpassed. The ‘holy people’, which had retained
only priestly values, priestly words, for all things, and with a consistency capable of
inspiring fear had separated itself from everything else powerful on earth, calling it
‘unholy’, ‘world’, ‘sin’ – this people produced for its instinct a formula which was
logical to the point of self-negation: as Christianity it negated the last remaining
form of reality, the ‘holy people’, the ‘chosen people’, the Jewish reality itself. The
case is of the first rank: the little rebellious movement which is baptized with the
name of Jesus of Nazareth is the Jewish instinct once more – in other words the
priestly instinct which can no longer endure the priest as a reality, the invention of
an even more abstract form of existence, an even more unreal vision of the world
than one conditioned by an organized Church. Christianity negates the Church…
I fail to see against what the revolt was directed whose originator Jesus is
understood or misunderstood to be if it was not a revolt against the Jewish Church –
‘Church’ taken in precisely the sense in which we take the word today. It was a
revolt against ‘the good and the just’, against ‘the saints of Israel’, against the social
hierarchy – not against a corruption of these but against caste, privilege, the order,
the social form; it was disbelief in ‘higher men’, a No uttered towards everything
that was priest and theologian. But the hierarchy which was thus called in question,
even if only momentarily, was the pile-work upon which the Jewish nation
continued to exist at all in the midst of the ‘waters’ – the laboriously-achieved last
possibility of remaining in being, the residuum of its separate political existence: an

attack on this was an attack on the profoundest national instinct, on the toughest
national will to life which has ever existed on earth. This holy anarchist who roused
up the lowly, the outcasts and ‘sinners’, the Chandala within Judaism to oppose the
ruling order – in language which, if the Gospels are to be trusted, would even today
lead to Siberia – was a political criminal, in so far as political criminals were
possible in an absurdly unpolitical society. This is what brought him to the Cross:
the proof is the inscription on the Cross. He died for his guilt – all ground is lacking
for the assertion, however often it is made, that he died for the guilt of others. –

28
It is quite another question whether he was conscious of any such antithesis –
whether he was not merely felt to be this antithesis. And here for the first time I
touch on the problem of the psychology of the redeemer. – I confess there are few
books which present me with so many difficulties as the Gospels do. These
difficulties are quite other than those which the learned curiosity of the German
mind celebrated one of its most unforgettable triumphs in pointing out. The time is
far distant when I too, like every young scholar and with the clever dullness of a
refined philologist, savoured the work of the incomparable Strauss. I was then
twenty years old: now I am too serious for that. What do I care for the
contradictions of ‘tradition’? How can legends of saints be called ‘tradition’ at all!
The stories of saints are the most ambiguous literature in existence: to apply to them
scientific procedures when no other records are extant seems to me wrong in
principle – mere learned idling…

29
What I am concerned with is the psychological type of the redeemer. For it could be
contained in the Gospels in spite of the Gospels, however much mutilated and
overloaded with foreign traits: as that of Francis of Assisi is contained in the
legends about him in spite of the legends. Not the truth about what he did, what he
said, how he really died: but the question whether his type is still conceivable at all,
whether it has been ‘handed down’ by tradition. – The attempts I know of to extract
even the history of a ‘soul’ from the Gospels seem to me proofs of an execrable
psychological frivolity. Monsieur Renan, that buffoon in psychologicis, has
appropriated for his explication of the type Jesus the two most inapplicable concepts
possible in this case: the concept of the genius and the concept of the hero. But if
anything is unevangelic it is the concept hero. Precisely the opposite of all
contending, of all feeling oneself in struggle has here become instinct: the
incapacity for resistance here becomes morality (‘resist not evil!’: the profoundest
saying of the Gospel, its key in a certain sense), blessedness in peace, in gentleness,

in the inability for enmity. What are the ‘glad tidings’? True life, eternal life is
found – it is not promised, it is here, it is within you: as life lived in love, in love
without deduction or exclusion, without distance. Everyone is a child of God –
Jesus definitely claims nothing for himself alone – as a child of God everyone is
equal to everyone else.… To make a hero of Jesus! – And what a worse
misunderstanding is the word ‘genius’! Our whole concept, our cultural concept
‘spirit’ had no meaning whatever in the world Jesus lived in. To speak with the
precision of the physiologist a quite different word would rather be in place here:
the word idiot. We recognize a condition of morbid susceptibility of the sense of
touch which makes it shrink back in horror from every contact, every grasping of a
firm object. Translate such a physiological habitus* into its ultimate logic – as
instinctive hatred of every reality, as flight into the ‘ungraspable’, into the
‘inconceivable’, as antipathy towards every form, every spacial and temporal
concept, towards everything firm, all that is custom, institution, Church, as being at
home in a world undisturbed by reality of any kind, a merely ‘inner’ world, a ‘real’
world, an ‘eternal’ world.… ‘The kingdom of God is within you’…

30
Instinctive hatred of reality: consequence of an extreme capacity for suffering and
irritation which no longer wants to be ‘touched’ at all because it feels every contact
too deeply.
Instinctive exclusion of all aversion, all enmity, all feeling for limitation and
distancing: consequence of an extreme capacity for suffering and irritation which
already feels all resisting, all need for resistance, as an unbearable displeasure (that
is to say as harmful, as deprecated by the instinct of self-preservation) and knows
blessedness (pleasure) only in no longer resisting anyone or anything, neither the
evil nor the evil-doer – love as the sole, as the last possibility of life…
These are the two physiological realities upon which, out of which the doctrine of
redemption has grown. I call it a sublime further evolution of hedonism on a
thoroughly morbid basis. Closest related to it, even if with a considerable addition
of Greek vitality and nervous energy, is Epicureanism, the redemption doctrine of
the pagan world. Epicurus a typical décadent: first recognized as such by me. – The
fear of pain, even of the infinitely small in pain – cannot end otherwise than in a
religion of love…

31
I have anticipated my answer to the problem. Its presupposition is that the type of
the redeemer has been preserved to us only in a very distorted form. That this

distortion should have occurred is in itself very probable: there are several reasons
why such a type could not remain pure, whole, free of accretions. The milieu in
which this strange figure moved must have left its mark upon him, as must even
more the history, the fate of the first Christian community: from this the type was
retrospectively enriched with traits which become comprehensible only with
reference to warfare and the aims of propaganda. That strange and sick world to
which the Gospels introduce us – a world like that of a Russian novel, in which
refuse of society, neurosis and ‘childlike’ idiocy seem to make a rendezvous – must
in any case have coarsened the type: the first disciples in particular had to translate
a being immersed entirely in symbols and incomprehensibilities into their own
crudity in order to understand anything of it at all – for them such a type could not
exist until it had been reduced to more familiar forms.… The prophet, the Messiah,
the judge who is to come, the moral preacher, the miracle-worker, John the Baptist
– so many opportunities for misunderstanding the type.… Finally, let us not
underestimate the proprium* of all extreme, and in particular sectarian veneration: it
extinguishes the original often painfully unfamiliar traits and idiosyncrasies in the
revered being – it even fails to see them. One has to regret that no Dostoyevsky
lived in the neighbourhood of this most interesting décadent; I mean someone who
could feel the thrilling fascination of such a combination of the sublime, the sick
and the childish. One final viewpoint: the type, as a décadence type, could in fact
have been of a peculiar multiplicity and contradictoriness: such a possibility cannot
be entirely excluded. But everything speaks against it: for if it were so the tradition
would have to have been remarkably faithful and objective: and we have reasons for
assuming the opposite. In the meantime, there yawns a contradiction between the
mountain, lake and field preacher, whose appearance strikes one as that of a Buddha
on a soil very little like that of India, and the aggressive fanatic, the mortal enemy
of theologian and priest, which Renan has wickedly glorified as ‘le grand maitre en
ironie’. I myself have no doubt that this plentiful measure of gall (and even of
esprit) has only overflowed on to the type of the Master out of the excited condition
of Christian propaganda: for one knows very well how resolutely all sectarians
adjust their Master into an apologia of themselves. When the first community had
need of a censuring theologian to oppose the theologians they created their ‘God’
according to their requirements: just as they unhesitatingly put into his mouth those
totally unevangelic concepts which they could not now do without, ‘Second
Coming’, ‘Last Judgement’, every kind of temporal promise and expectation. –

32
I resist, to repeat it, the incorporation of the fanatic into the type of the redeemer:
the word impérieux alone which Renan employs already annuls the type. The ‘glad

tidings’ are precisely that there are no more opposites; the kingdom of Heaven
belongs to children; the faith which here finds utterance is not a faith which has
been won by struggle – it is there, from the beginning, it is as it were a return to
childishness in the spiritual domain. The occurrence of retarded puberty
undeveloped in the organism as a consequence of degeneration is familiar at any
rate to physiologists. – Such a faith is not angry, does not censure, does not defend
itself: it does not bring ‘the sword’ – it has no idea to what extent it could one day
cause dissention. It does not prove itself, either by miracles or by rewards and
promises, and certainly not ‘by the Scriptures’: it is every moment its own miracle,
its own reward, its own proof, its own ‘kingdom of God’. Neither does this faith
formulate itself – it lives, it resists formulas. Chance, to be sure, determines the
environment, the language, the preparatory schooling of a particular configuration
of concepts: primitive Christianity employs only Judeo-Semitic concepts (– eating
and drinking at communion belong here, concepts so sadly abused, like everything
Jewish, by the Church). But one must be careful not to see in this anything but a
sign-language, a semeiotic, an occasion for metaphors. It is precisely on condition
that nothing he says is taken literally that this anti-realist can speak at all. Among
Indians he would have made use of Sankhyam concepts, among Chinese those of
Lao-tse – and would not have felt the difference. – One could, with some freedom
of expression, call Jesus a ‘free spirit’ – he cares nothing for what is fixed: the word
killeth, everything fixed killeth. The concept, the experience ‘life’ in the only form
he knows it is opposed to any kind of word, formula, law, faith, dogma. He speaks
only of the inmost thing: ‘life’ or ‘truth’ or ‘light’ is his expression for the inmost
thing – everything else, the whole of reality, the whole of nature, language itself,
possesses for him merely the value of a sign, a metaphor. – On this point one must
make absolutely no mistake, however much Christian, that is to say ecclesiastical
prejudice, may tempt one to do so: such a symbolist par excellence stands outside
of all religion, all conceptions of divine worship, all history, all natural science, all
experience of the world, all acquirements, all politics, all psychology, all books, all
art – his ‘knowledge’ is precisely the pure folly of the fact that anything of this kind
exists. He has not so much as heard of culture, he does not need to fight against it –
he does not deny it.… The same applies to the state, to society and the entire civic
order, to work, to war – he never had reason to deny ‘the world’, he had no notion
of the ecclesiastical concept ‘world’.… Denial is precisely what is totally
impossible for him. – Dialectics are likewise lacking, the idea is lacking that a faith,
a ‘truth’ could be proved by reasons (– his proofs are inner ‘lights’, inner feelings of
pleasure and self-affirmations, nothing but ‘proofs by potency’ –). Neither can such
a doctrine argue: it simply does not understand that other doctrines exist, can exist,
it simply does not know how to imagine an opinion contrary to its own.… Where it
encounters one it will, with the most heartfelt sympathy, lament the ‘blindness’ –

for it sees the ‘light’ – but it will make no objection…

33
In the entire psychology of the ‘Gospel’ the concept guilt and punishment is
lacking; likewise the concept reward. ‘Sin’, every kind of distancing relationship
between God and man, is abolished – precisely this is the ‘glad tidings’.
Blessedness is not promised, it is not tied to any conditions: it is the only reality –
the rest is signs for speaking of it…
The consequence of such a condition projects itself into a new practice, the true
evangelic practice. It is not a ‘belief’ which distinguishes the Christian: the
Christian acts, he is distinguished by a different mode of acting. Neither by words
nor in his heart does he resist the man who does him evil. He makes no distinction
between foreigner and native, between Jew and non-Jew (‘one’s neighbour’ is
properly one’s co-religionist, the Jew). He is not angry with anyone, does not
disdain anyone. He neither appears in courts of law nor claims their protection (‘not
swearing’). Under no circumstances, not even in the case of proved unfaithfulness,
does he divorce his wife. – All fundamentally one law, all consequences of one
instinct. –
The life of the redeemer was nothing else than this practice – his death too was
nothing else.… He no longer required any formulas, any rites for communicating
with God – not even prayer. He has settled his accounts with the whole Jewish
penance-and-reconciliation doctrine; he knows that it is through the practice of
one’s life that one feels ‘divine’, ‘blessed’, ‘evangelic’, at all times a ‘child of God’.
It is not ‘penance’, not ‘prayer for forgiveness’ which leads to God: evangelic
practice alone leads to God, it is God! – What was abolished with the Evangel was
the Judaism of the concepts ‘sin’, ‘forgiveness of sin’, ‘faith’, ‘redemption by
faith’–the whole of Jewish ecclesiastical teaching was denied in the ‘glad tidings’.
The profound instinct for how one would have to live in order to feel oneself ‘in
Heaven’, to feel oneself ‘eternal’, while in every other condition one by no means
feels oneself ‘in Heaven’: this alone is the psychological reality of ‘redemption’. –
A new way of living, not a new belief…

34
If I understand anything of this great symbolist it is that he took for realities, for
‘truths’, only inner realities – that he understood the rest, everything pertaining to
nature, time, space, history, only as signs, as occasion for metaphor. The concept
‘the Son of Man’ is not a concrete person belonging to history, anything at all
individual or unique, but an ‘eternal’ fact, a psychological symbol freed from the

time concept. The same applies supremely to the God of this typical symbolist, to
the ‘kingdom of God’, to the ‘kingdom of Heaven’, to ‘God’s children’. Nothing is
more un-Christian than the ecclesiastical crudities of a God as a person, of a
‘kingdom of God’ which comes, of a ‘kingdom of Heaven’ in the Beyond, of a ‘Son
of God’, the second person of the Trinity. All this – forgive the expression – a fist
in the eye* – oh in what an eye! – of the Gospel: world-historical cynicism in the
mockery of symbolism.… But it is patently obvious what is alluded to in the
symbols ‘Father’ and ‘Son’ – not patently obvious to everyone, I grant: in the word
‘Son’ is expressed the entry into the collective feeling of the transfiguration of all
things (blessedness), in the word ‘Father’ this feeling itself, the feeling of perfection
and eternity. – I am ashamed to recall what the Church has made of this symbolism:
has it not set an Amphitryon† story at the threshold of Christian ‘faith’? And a
dogma of ‘immaculate conception’ into the bargain?… But it has thereby maculated
conception–
The ‘Kingdom of Heaven’ is a condition of the heart – not something that comes
‘upon the earth’ or ‘after death’. The entire concept of natural death is lacking in the
Gospel: death is not a bridge, not a transition, it is lacking because it belongs to
quite another world, a merely apparent world useful only for the purpose of
symbolism. The ‘hour of death’ is not a Christian concept – the ‘hour’, time,
physical life and its crises, simply do not exist for the teacher of the ‘glad tidings’.
… The ‘kingdom of God’ is not something one waits for; it has no yesterday or
tomorrow, it does not come ‘in a thousand years’ – it is an experience within a
heart; it is everywhere, it is nowhere…

35
This ‘bringer of glad tidings’ died as he lived, as he taught – not to ‘redeem
mankind’ but to demonstrate how one ought to live. What he bequeathed to
mankind is his practice: his bearing before the judges, before the guards, before the
accusers and every kind of calumny and mockery – his bearing on the Cross. He
does not resist, he does not defend his rights, he takes no steps to avert the worst
that can happen to him – more, he provokes it…. And he entreats, he suffers, he
loves with those, in those who are doing evil to him. His words to the thief on the
Cross contain the whole Evangel. ‘That was verily a divine man, a child of God!’ –
says the thief. ‘If thou feelest this’ – answers the redeemer – ‘thou art in Paradise,
thou art a child of God.’ Not to defend oneself, not to grow angry, not to make
responsible.… But not to resist even the evil man – to love him…

36
– Only we, we emancipated spirits, possess the prerequisite for understanding

something nineteen centuries have misunderstood – that integrity become instinct
and passion which makes war on the ‘holy lie’ even more than on any other lie.…
One has been unspeakably far from our benevolent and cautious neutrality, from
that discipline of the spirit through which alone the divining of such strange, such
delicate things is made possible: at all times one has, with shameless self-seeking,
desired only one’s own advantage in these things, one constructed the Church out of
the antithesis to the Gospel.
If anyone were looking for a sign that an ironical divinity was at work behind the
great universal drama he would find no small support in the tremendous questionmark called Christianity. That mankind should fall on its knees before the opposite
of what was the origin, the meaning, the right of the Gospel, that it should have
sanctified in the concept ‘Church’ precisely what the ‘bringer of glad tidings’
regarded as beneath him, behind him – one seeks in vain a grander form of worldhistorical irony –

37
– Our age is proud of its historical sense: how was it able to make itself believe in
the nonsensical notion that the crude miracle-worker and redeemer fable comes at
the commencement of Christianity – and that everything spiritual and symbolic is
only a subsequent development? On the contrary: the history of Christianity – and
that from the very death on the Cross – is the history of progressively cruder
misunderstanding of an original symbolism. With every extension of Christianity
over even broader, even ruder masses in whom the preconditions out of which it
was born were more and more lacking, it became increasingly necessary to
vulgarize, to barbarize Christianity – it absorbed the doctrines and rites of every
subterranean cult of the Imperium Romanum, it absorbed the absurdities of every
sort of morbid reason. The fate of Christianity lies in the necessity for its faith itself
to grow as morbid, low and vulgar as the requirements it was intended to satisfy
were morbid, low and vulgar. As the Church, this morbid barbarism itself finally
assumes power – the Church, that form of mortal hostility to all integrity, to all
loftiness of soul, to discipline of spirit, to all open-hearted and benevolent humanity.
– Christian values – noble values: it is only we, we emancipated spirits, who have
restored this greatest of all value-antitheses! –

38
– At this point I shall not suppress a sigh. There are days when I am haunted by a
feeling blacker than the blackest melancholy – contempt of man. And so as to leave
no doubt as to what I despise, whom I despise: it is the man of today, the man with
whom I am fatefully contemporary. The man of today – I suffocate of his impure

breath.… With regard to the past I am, like all men of knowledge, of a large
tolerance, that is to say a magnanimous self-control: I traverse the madhouse-world
of entire millennia, be it called ‘Christianity’, ‘Christian faith’, ‘Christian Church’,
with a gloomy circumspection – I take care not to make mankind responsible for its
insanities. But my feelings suddenly alter, burst forth, immediately I enter the
modern age, our age. Our age knows…. What was formerly merely morbid has
today become indecent – it is indecent to be a Christian today. And here is where
my disgust commences. – I look around me: there is no longer a word left of what
was formerly called ‘truth’, we no longer endure it when a priest so much as utters
the word ‘truth’. Even with the most modest claim to integrity one must know today
that a theologian, a priest, a pope does not merely err in every sentence he speaks,
he lies – that he is no longer free to lie ‘innocently’, out of ‘ignorance’. The priest
knows as well as anyone that there is no longer any ‘God’, any ‘sinner’, any
‘redeemer’ – that ‘free will’, ‘moral world-order’ are lies – intellectual seriousness,
the profound self-overcoming of the intellect, no longer permits anyone not to know
about these things.… All the concepts of the Church are recognized for what they
are: the most malicious false-coinage there is for the purpose of disvaluing nature
and natural values; the priest himself is recognized for what he is: the most
dangerous kind of parasite, the actual poison-spider of life.… We know, our
conscience knows today – what those sinister inventions of priest and Church are
worth, what end they serve, with which that state of human self-violation has
brought about which is capable of exciting disgust at the sight of mankind – the
concepts ‘Beyond’, ‘Last Judgement’, ‘immortality of the soul’, the ‘soul’ itself:
they are instruments of torture, they are forms of systematic cruelty by virtue of
which the priest has become master, stays master.… Everyone knows this: and
everyone none the less remains unchanged. Where have the last feelings of decency
and self-respect gone when even our statesmen, in other ways very unprejudiced
kind of men and practical anti-Christians through and through, still call themselves
Christians today and go to Communion?… A young prince at the head of his
regiments, splendid as the expression of his people’s egoism and presumption – but
without any shame professing himself a Christian!… Whom then does Christianity
deny? what does it call ‘world’? Being a soldier, being a judge, being a patriot;
defending oneself; preserving one’s honour; desiring to seek one’s advantage; being
proud…. The practice of every hour, every instinct, every valuation which leads to
action is today anti-Christian: what a monster of falsity modern man must be that he
is none the less not ashamed to be called a Christian!

39
– To resume, I shall now relate the real history of Christianity. – The word

‘Christianity’ is already a misunderstanding – in reality there has been only one
Christian, and he died on the Cross. The ‘Evangel’ died on the Cross. What was
called ‘Evangel’ from this moment onwards was already the opposite of what he
had lived: ‘bad tidings’, a dysangel. It is false to the point of absurdity to see in a
‘belief, perchance the belief in redemption through Christ, the distinguishing
characteristic of the Christian: only Christian practice, a life such as he who died on
the Cross lived, is Christian.… Even today, such a life is possible, for certain men
even necessary: genuine, primitive Christianity will be possible at all times.… Not a
belief but a doing, above all a not-doing of many things, a different being…. States
of consciousness, beliefs of any kind, holding something to be true for example –
every psychologist knows, this – are a matter of complete indifference and of the
fifth rank compared with the value of the instincts: to speak more strictly, the whole
concept of spiritual causality is false. To reduce being a Christian, Christianness, to
a holding something to be true, to a mere phenomenality of consciousness, means to
negate Christianness. In fact there have been no Christians at all. The ‘Christian’,
that which has been called Christian for two millennia, is merely a psychological
self-misunderstanding. Regarded more closely, that which has ruled in him, in spite
of all his ‘faith’, has been merely the instincts – and what instincts! ‘Faith’ has been
at all times, with Luther for instance, only a cloak, a pretext, a screen, behind which
the instincts played their game – a shrewd blindness to the dominance of certain
instincts.… ‘Faith’ – I have already called it the true Christian shrewdness – one has
always spoken of faith, one has always acted from instinct.… The Christian’s world
of ideas contains nothing which so much as touches upon actuality: on the other
hand, we have recognized in instinctive hatred for actuality the driving element, the
only driving element in the roots of Christianity. What follows therefrom? That
here, in psychologicis also, error is radical, that is to say determinant of the essence,
that is to say substance. One concept removed, a single reality substituted in its
place – and the whole of Christianity crumbles to nothing! – From a lofty
standpoint, this strangest of all facts, a religion not only determined by errors but
inventive and even possessing genius only in harmful, only in life-poisoning and
heart-poisoning errors, remains a spectacle for the gods – for those divinities which
are at the same time philosophers and which I encountered, for example, during
those celebrated dialogues on Naxos. In the hour when their disgust leaves them (–
and leaves us!) they become grateful for the spectacle of the Christian: perhaps it is
only for the sake of this curious case that the pathetic little star called Earth
deserves a divine glance and divine participation.… For let us not undervalue the
Christian: the Christian, false to the point of innocence, far surpasses the ape – with
respect to Christians a well-known theory of descent becomes a mere compliment…

40

– The fate of the Evangel was determined by the death – it hung on the Cross.… It
was only the death, this unexpected shameful death, only the Cross, which was in
general reserved for the canaille alone – it was only this terrible paradox which
brought the disciples face to face with the real enigma: ‘Who was that? What was
that?’ – The feeling of being shaken and disappointed to their depths, the suspicion
that such a death might be the refutation of their cause, the frightful question-mark
‘why has this happened?’ – this condition is only too understandable. Here
everything had to be necessary, meaningful, reasonable, reasonable in the highest
degree; a disciple’s love knows nothing of chance. Only now did the chasm open
up: ‘Who killed him? who was his natural enemy?’ – this question came like a flash
of lightning. Answer: ruling Judaism, its upper class. From this moment one felt
oneself in mutiny against the social order, one subsequently understood Jesus as
having been in mutiny against the social order. Up till then this warlike trait, this
negative trait in word and deed, was lacking in his image; more, he was the
contradiction of it. Clearly the little community had failed to understand precisely
the main thing, the exemplary element in his manner of dying, the freedom from,
the superiority over every feeling of ressentiment: – a sign of how little they
understood of him at all! Jesus himself could have desired nothing by his death but
publicly to offer the sternest test, the proof of his teaching.… But his disciples were
far from forgiving his death – which would have been evangelic in the highest
sense; not to speak of offering themselves up to a similar death in sweet and gentle
peace of heart.… Precisely the most unevangelic of feelings, revengefulness, again
came uppermost. The affair could not possibly be at an end with this death: one
required ‘retribution’, ‘judgement’ (– and yet what can be more unevangelic than
‘retribution’, ‘punishment’, ‘sitting in judgement’!). The popular expectation of a
Messiah came once more into the foreground; an historic moment appeared in view:
the ‘kingdom of God’ is coming to sit in judgement on its enemies.… But with this
everything is misunderstood: the ‘kingdom of God’ as a last act, as a promise! For
the Evangel had been precisely the existence, the fulfilment, the actuality of this
‘kingdom’. Such a death was precisely this ‘kingdom of God’. Only now was all
that contempt for and bitterness against Pharisee and theologian worked into the
type of the Master – one thereby made of him a Pharisee and theologian! On the
other hand, the enraged reverence of these utterly unhinged souls could no longer
endure that evangelic equal right of everyone to be a child of God which Jesus had
taught, and their revenge consisted in exalting Jesus in an extravagant fashion, in
severing him from themselves: just as the Jews, in revenge on their enemies, had
previously separated their God from themselves and raised him on high. The one
God and the one Son of God: both products of ressentiment…

41

– And now an absurd problem came up: ‘How could God have permitted that?’ For
this question the deranged reason of the little community found a downright
terrifyingly absurd answer: God gave his Son for the forgiveness of sins, as a
sacrifice. All at once it was all over with the Gospel! The guilt sacrifice, and that in
its most repulsive, barbaric form, the sacrifice of the innocent man for the sins of
the guilty! What atrocious paganism! – For Jesus had done away with the concept
‘guilt’ itself – he had denied any chasm between God and man, he lived this unity
of God and man as his ‘glad tidings’.… And not as a special prerogative! – From
now on there is introduced into the type of the redeemer step by step: the doctrine
of a Judgement and a Second Coming, the doctrine of his death as a sacrificial
death, the doctrine of the Resurrection with which the entire concept ‘blessedness’,
the whole and sole reality of the Evangel, is juggled away – for the benefit of a state
after death!… Paul, with that rabbinical insolence which characterizes him in every
respect, rationalized this interpretation, this indecency of an interpretation, thus: ‘If
Christ is not resurrected from the dead our faith is vain’. – All at once the Evangel
became the most contemptible of all unfulfillable promises, the impudent doctrine
of personal immortality.… Paul himself even taught it as a reward!…

42
One sees what came to an end with the death on the Cross: a new, an absolutely
primary beginning to a Buddhistic peace movement, to an actual and not merely
promised happiness on earth. For this remains – I have already emphasized it – the
basic distinction between the two décadence religions: Buddhism makes no
promises but keeps them, Christianity makes a thousand promises but keeps none. –
On the heels of the ‘glad tidings’ came the worst of all: those of Paul. In Paul was
embodied the antithetical type to the ‘bringer of glad tidings’, the genius of hatred,
of the vision of hatred, of the inexorable logic of hatred. What did this dysangelist
not sacrifice to his hatred! The redeemer above all: he nailed him to his Cross. The
life, the example, the teaching, the death, the meaning and the right of the entire
Gospel – nothing was left once this hate-obsessed false-coiner had grasped what
alone he could make use of. Not the reality, not the historical truth!… And once
more the priestly instinct of the Jew perpetrated the same great crime against history
– it simply erased the yesterday and the day before yesterday of Christianity, it
devised for itself a history of primitive Christianity. More: it falsified the history of
Israel over again so as to make this history seem the pre-history of its act: all the
prophets had spoken of its ‘redeemer’.… The Church subsequently falsified even
the history of mankind into the pre-history of Christianity.… The type of the
redeemer, the doctrine, the practice, the death, the meaning of the death, even the
sequel to the death – nothing was left untouched, nothing was left bearing even the

remotest resemblance to reality. Paul simply shifted the centre of gravity of that
entire existence beyond this existence – in the lie of the ‘resurrected’ Jesus. In fact
he could make no use at all of the redeemer’s life – he needed the death on the
Cross and something in addition.… To regard as honest a Paul whose home was the
principle centre of Stoic enlightenment when he makes of a hallucination the proof
that the redeemer is still living, or even to believe his story that he had this
hallucination, would be a real niaiserie on the part of a psychologist: Paul willed the
end, consequently he willed the means.… What he himself did not believe was
believed by the idiots among whom he cast his teaching. – His requirement was
power; with Paul the priest again sought power – he could employ only those
concepts, teachings, symbols with which one tyrannizes over masses, forms herds.
What was the only thing Mohammed later borrowed from Christianity? The
invention of Paul, his means for establishing a priestly tyranny, for forming herds:
the belief in immortality – that is to say the doctrine of ‘judgement’…

43
If one shifts the centre of gravity of life out of life into the ‘Beyond’ – into
nothingness – one has deprived life as such of its centre of gravity. The great lie of
personal immortality destroys all rationality, all naturalness of instinct – all that is
salutary, all that is life-furthering, all that holds a guarantee of the future in the
instincts henceforth excites mistrust. So to live that there is no longer any meaning
in living: that now becomes the ‘meaning’ of life.… What is the point of public
spirit, what is the point of gratitude for one’s descent and one’s forefathers, what is
the point of co-operation, trust, of furthering and keeping in view the general
welfare?… So many ‘temptations’, so many diversions from the ‘right road’ – ‘one
thing is needful’.… That, as an ‘immortal soul’, everybody is equal to everybody
else, that in the totality of beings the ‘salvation’ of every single one is permitted to
claim to be of everlasting moment, that little bigots and three-quarters madmen are
permitted to imagine that for their sakes the laws of nature are continually being
broken – such a raising of every sort of egoism to infinity, to impudence, cannot be
branded with sufficient contempt. And yet it is to this pitiable flattery of personal
vanity that Christianity owes its victory – it is with this that it has persuaded over to
its side everything ill-constituted, rebellious-minded, under-privileged, all the dross
and refuse of mankind. ‘Salvation of the soul’ – in plain words: ‘The world revolves
around me’… The poison of the doctrine ‘equal rights for all’ – this has been more
thoroughly sowed by Christianity than by anything else; from the most secret
recesses of base instincts, Christianity has waged a war to the death against every
feeling of reverence and distance between man and man, against, that is, the
precondition of every elevation, every increase in culture – it has forged out of the

ressentiment of the masses its chief weapon against us, against everything noble,
joyful, high-spirited on earth, against our happiness on earth.… ‘Immortality’
granted to every Peter and Paul has been the greatest and most malicious outrage on
noble mankind ever committed. – And let us not underestimate the fatality that has
crept out of Christianity even into politics! No one any longer possesses today the
courage to claim special privileges or the right to rule, the courage to feel a sense of
reverence towards himself and towards his equals – the courage for a pathos of
distance…. Our politics is morbid from this lack of courage! – The aristocratic
outlook has been undermined most deeply by the lie of equality of souls; and if the
belief in the ‘prerogative of the majority’ makes revolutions and will continue to
make them – it is Christianity, let there be no doubt about it, Christian value
judgement which translates every revolution into mere blood and crime! Christianity
is a revolt of everything that crawls along the ground directed against that which is
elevated: the Gospel of the ‘lowly’ makes low…

44
– The Gospels are invaluable as evidence of the already irresistible corruption
within the first community. What Paul later carried to its conclusion with the
cynical logic of a rabbi was none the less merely the process of decay which
commenced with the death of the redeemer. – One cannot read these Gospels too
warily; there are difficulties behind every word. I hope I shall be pardoned for
confessing that they are for that very reason a pleasure of the first rank to a
psychologist – as the opposite of all kinds of naïve depravity, as refinement par
excellence, as artistry in psychological depravity. The Gospels are in a class by
themselves. The Bible in general admits of no comparison. One is among Jews: first
consideration if one is not to lose the thread completely. This self-pretence of
‘holiness’, which here becomes downright genius and which has not since been
even approximately equalled among books and men, this false-coinage of word and
attitude as an art, is not the chance product of some individual talent, some
exceptional nature. Race is required for it. In Christianity, as the art of holy lying,
the whole of Judaism, a schooling and technique pursued with the utmost
seriousness for hundreds of years, attains its ultimate perfection. The Christian, that
ultima ratio of the lie, is the Jew once more – even thrice more.… The will to
employ as a matter of principle only concepts, symbols, attitudes manifested in the
practice of the priest, the instinctive rejection of every other practice, every other
kind of perspective in the realm of values and practical application – that is not
tradition, it is inheritance: only as inheritance does it have the effect of a natural
quality. The whole of mankind, even the finest heads of the finest epochs (with one
exception, who is perhaps merely a monster –) have allowed themselves to be

deceived. The Gospel has been read as the Book of Innocence.… no small pointer to
the degree of histrionic mastery displayed in it. – If we got to see them, to be sure,
even if only in passing, all these singular bigots and artificial saints, it would be the
end of them – and it is precisely because I never read a word without seeing an
attitude that I make an end of them…. They have a way of raising their eyes to
Heaven which I cannot endure. – Fortunately books are for most people merely
literature. – One must not let oneself be misled: they say ‘Judge not!’ but they send
to Hell everything that stands in their way. By allowing God to judge they
themselves judge; by glorifying God they glorify themselves; by demanding
precisely those virtues of which they themselves are capable – more, which they are
in need of to stay on top at all – they present a great appearance of contending for
virtue, of struggling for the triumph of virtue. ‘We live, we die, we sacrifice
ourselves for the good’ (– ‘truth’, ‘the light’, the ‘kingdom of God’): in reality they
do what they cannot help doing. By making their way in a sneaking fashion, sitting
in corners, living out shadowy lives in the shadows, they make a duty of it: their life
of humility appears to be a duty, as humility it is one more proof of piety.… Ah this
humble, chaste, compassionate mode of mendaciousness! ‘For us virtue itself shall
bear witness’.… Read the Gospels as books of seduction by means of morality:
these petty people have placed a distraint on morality – they know what use it can
be put to! Mankind can best be led by the nose with morality! – The reality is that
here the most conscious arrogance of the elect is posing as modesty: one has placed
oneself, the ‘community’, the ‘good and just’, once and for all on one side, on the
side of ‘truth’ – and the rest, ‘the world’, on the other.… That has been the most
fateful kind of megalomania that has ever existed on earth: little abortions of bigots
and liars began to lay claim to the concepts ‘God’, ‘truth’, ‘light’, ‘spirit’, ‘love’,
‘wisdom’, ‘life’, as if these were synonyms of themselves so as to divide
themselves off from the ‘world’; little superlatives of Jews, ripe for every kind of
madhouse, twisted values in general to suit themselves, as if only the ‘Christian’
were the meaning, the salt, the measure and also the ultimate tribunal of all the rest.
… The whole fatality was possible only because there was already in the world a
related, racially-related megalomania, the Jewish: once the chasm between Jews and
Jewish Christians opened up, the latter were left with no alternative but to employ
against the Jews the very self-preservative procedures counselled by the Jewish
instinct, while the Jews had previously employed them only against everything nonJewish. The Christian is only a Jew of a ‘freer’ confession. –

45
– I give a few examples of what these petty people have taken into their heads, what
they have put into the mouth of their Master: confessions of ‘beautiful souls’ one

and all. –
‘And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence,
shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto
you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgement,
than for that city.’ (Mark vi, 11) – How evangelic!…
‘And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it is better
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.’
(Mark ix, 42) – How evangelic!…
‘And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out; it is better for thee to enter into the
kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: Where
their worm death not, and the fire is not quenched.’ (Mark ix, 47–8) – It is not
precisely the eye that is meant…
‘Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shall
not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.’ (Mark
ix, 1) – Well lied, lion…
‘Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and
follow me. For…’ (Observation of a psychologist: Christian morality is refuted by
its fors: its ‘reasons’ refute – thus is it Christian.) (Mark viii, 34–5).
‘Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgement ye judge, ye shall be
judged.’ (Matthew vii, 1–2) – What a conception of justice, of a ‘just’ judge!…
‘For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
publicans do the same? And if ye salute your brethren only what do ye more than
others? do not even the publicans so?’ (Matthew v, 46–7) – Principle of ‘Christian
love’: it wants to be well paid…
‘But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses.’ (Matthew vi, 15) – Very compromising for the said ‘Father’…
‘But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things
shall be added unto you.’ (Matthew vi, 33) – All these things: namely food,
clothing, all the essentials of life. An error, to put it mildly…. A little earlier God
appears as a tailor, at least under certain circumstances*…
‘Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for behold, your reward is great in
heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.’ (Luke vi, 23) –
Impudent rabble! It already compares itself with the prophets….
‘Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth
in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple

of God is holy, which temple ye are.’ (1 Corinthians iii, 16–17) – Such things as
this cannot be sufficiently despised…
‘Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be
judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?’ (1 Corinthians vi, 2)
– Unfortunately not merely the ravings of a lunatic…. This frightful impostor goes
on to say: ‘Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that
pertain to this life?’…
‘Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in the
wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe…; not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: But God hath chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; And base things of the
world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are
not, to bring to naught things that are: That no flesh should glory in his presence.’
(1 Corinthians i, 20 ff.) – To understand this passage, a document of the very first
rank for the psychology of every Chandala morality, one should read the first essay
of my Genealogy of Morals, where the antithesis between a noble morality and a
Chandala morality born of ressentiment and impotent revengefulness is first brought
to light. Paul was the greatest of all apostles of revenge…

46
– What follows from all this? That one does well to put gloves on when reading the
New Testament. The proximity of so much uncleanliness almost forces one to do
so. One would no more choose to associate with ‘first Christians’ than one would
with Polish Jews: not that one would need to prove so much as a single point
against them…. Neither of them smell very pleasant. – I have looked in vain for so
much as one sympathetic trait in the New Testament; there is nothing free,
benevolent, open-hearted, honest in it. Humanity has not taken its first step here –
the instincts of cleanliness are lacking…. There are only bad instincts in the New
Testament, there is not even the courage for these bad instincts. Everything in it is
cowardice, everything is self-deception and closing one’s eyes to oneself. Every
book becomes clean if one has just read the New Testament: to give an example,
immediately after reading Paul I read with delight that sweetest and most highspirited of all mockers, Petronius, of whom one could say what Domenico
Boccaccio wrote to the Duke of Parma of Cesare Borgia: ‘è tutto festo’ –
immortally healthy, immortally cheerful and well-constituted…. For these little
bigots miscalculate in the main thing. They attack, but everything attacked by them
is thereby signalized. Whomever a ‘first Christian’ attacks is not besmirched by

it…. Conversely: it is an honour to have ‘first Christians’ against one. It is
impossible to read the New Testament without feeling a partiality for that which is
ill-treated in it – to say nothing of the ‘wisdom of this world’ which an impudent
humbug tried in vain to confound…. But even the Scribes and Pharisees gain
advantage from having such an opponent: they must have been worth something to
be hated in such an indecent fashion. Hypocrisy – that’s rich coming from ‘first
Christians’! – The Scribes and Pharisees were the privileged: this sufficed,
Chandala hatred requires no further reasons. The ‘first Christian’ – and, I fear, also
the ‘last Christian’, whom I shall perhaps live to see – is a rebel in his lowest
instincts against everything privileged – he always lives and struggles for ‘equal
rights’…. More closely considered, he has no choice. If one wants to be, in one’s
own person, ‘chosen of God’ – or a ‘temple of God’, or a ‘judge of angels’ – then
every other principle of selection, for example on the basis of integrity, intellect,
manliness and pride, beauty and liberality of heart, is simply ‘world’ – evil as
such…. Moral: every word in the mouth of a ‘first Christian’ is a lie, every act he
performs an instinctive falsehood – all his values, all his aims are harmful, but
whomever he hates, whatever he hates, has value…. The Christian, the priestly
Christian especially, is a criterion of values. – Do I still have to add that in the
entire New Testament there is only one solitary figure one is obliged to respect?
Pilate, the Roman governor. To take a Jewish affair seriously – he cannot persuade
himself to do that. One Jew more or less – what does it matter?… The noble scorn
of a Roman before whom an impudent misuse of the word ‘truth’ was carried on
has enriched the New Testament with the only expression which possesses value –
which is its criticism, its annihilation even: ‘What is truth?’…

47
– What sets us apart is not that we recognize no God, either in history or in nature
or behind nature – but that we find that which has been reverenced as God not
‘godlike’ but pitiable, absurd, harmful, not merely an error but a crime against
life…. We deny God as God…. If this God of the Christians were proved to us to
exist, we should know even less how to believe in him. – In a formula: Deus,
qualem Paulus creavit, dei negation.* – A religion like Christianity, which is at no
point in contact with actuality, which crumbles away as soon as actuality comes into
its own at any point whatever, must naturally be a mortal enemy of the ‘wisdom of
the world’, that is to say of science – it will approve of all expedients by which
disciplining of the intellect, clarity and severity in matters of intellectual conscience,
noble coolness and freedom of intellect, can be poisoned and calumniated and
brought into ill repute. ‘Faith’ as an imperative is a veto against science – in praxi
the lie at any cost…. Paul understood the need for the lie, for ‘faith’; the Church

subsequently understood Paul. – That God which Paul invented for himself, a God
who ‘confounds the wisdom of the world’ (in a narrower sense the two great
opponents of all superstition, philology and medicine), is in reality only the resolute
determination of Paul himself to do so: to call one’s own will ‘God’ Torah† – that
is quintessentially Jewish. Paul wants to confound the ‘wisdom of the world’: his
enemies are the good philologists and physicians of the Alexandrian school – upon
them he makes war. In fact, one is not philologist and physician without also being
at the same time anti-Christian. For as philologist one sees behind the ‘sacred
books’, as physician behind the physiological depravity of the typical Christian. The
physician says ‘incurable’, the philologist ‘fraud’…

48
– Has the famous story which stands at the beginning of the Bible really been
understood – the story of God’s mortal terror of science;?… It has not been
understood. This priest’s-book begins, as is only proper, with the priest’s great inner
difficulty: he has only one great danger, consequently ‘God’ has only one great
danger. –
The old God, all ‘spirit’, all high priest, all perfection, promenades in his garden:
but he is bored. Against boredom the gods themselves fight in vain.* What does he
do? He invents man – man is entertaining…. But behold, man too is bored. God’s
sympathy with the only kind of distress found in every Paradise knows no bounds:
he forthwith creates other animals. God’s first blunder: man did not find the animals
entertaining – he dominated them, he did not even want to be an ‘animal’. –
Consequently God created woman. And then indeed there was an end to boredom –
but also to something else! Woman was God’s second blunder. – ‘Woman is in her
essence serpent, Heva’ – every priest knows that; ‘every evil comes into the world
through woman’ – every priest knows that likewise. ‘Consequently, science too
comes into the world through her’…. Only through woman did man learn to taste
the tree of knowledge. – What had happened? A mortal terror seized on the old
God. Man himself had become God’s greatest blunder; God had created for himself
a rival, science makes equal to God – it is all over with priests and gods if man
becomes scientific! – Moral: science is the forbidden in itself – it alone is
forbidden. Science is the first sin, the germ of all sins, original sin. This alone
constitutes morality. – ‘Thou shalt not know’ – the rest follows. – God’s mortal
terror did not stop him from being shrewd. How can one defend oneself against
science? – that was for long his chief problem. Answer: away with man out of
Paradise! Happiness, leisure gives room for thought – all thoughts are bad
thoughts…. Man shall not think. – And the ‘priest in himself invents distress, death,
the danger to life in pregnancy, every kind of misery, age, toil, above all sickness –

nothing but expedients in the struggle against science! Distress does not allow man
to think…. And none the less! oh horror! the structure of knowledge towers up,
heaven-storming, reaching for the divine – what to do! – The old God invents war,
he divides the peoples, he makes men destroy one another (– priests have always
had need of war…). War – among other things a great mischief-maker in science! –
Incredible! knowledge, emancipation from the priest, increases in spite of wars. –
And the old God comes to a final decision: ‘Man has become scientific – there is
nothing for it, he will have to be drowned!’…

49
– Have I been understood? The beginning of the Bible contains the entire
psychology of the priest. – The priest knows only one great danger: that is science –
the sound conception of cause and effect. But science flourishes in general only
under happy circumstances – one must have a superfluity of time and intellect in
order to ‘know’…. ‘Consequently man must be made unhappy’ – this has at all
times been the logic of the priest. – One will already have guessed what only came
into the world therewith, in accordance with this logic – ‘sin’…. The concept of
guilt and punishment, the entire ‘moral world-order’, was invented in opposition to
science – in opposition to the detaching of man from the priest…. Man shall not
look around him, he shall look down into himself; he shall not look prudently and
cautiously into things in order to learn, he shall not look at all: he shall suffer….
And he shall suffer in such a way that he has need of the priest at all times. – Away
with physicians! One has need of a Saviour. – The concept of guilt and punishment,
including the doctrine of ‘grace’, of ‘redemption’, of ‘forgiveness’ – lies through
and through and without any psychological reality – were invented to destroy the
causal sense of man: they are an outrage on the concept cause and effect! – And not
an outrage with the fist, with the knife, with honest hatred and love! But one from
the most cowardly, cunning, lowest instincts! An outrage of the priest! An outrage
of the parasite! A vampirism of pale subterranean bloodsuckers!… When the natural
consequences of an act are no longer ‘natural’ but thought of as effected by the
conceptual ghosts of superstition, by ‘God’, by ‘spirits’, by ‘souls’, as merely
‘moral’ consequences, as reward, punishment, sign, chastisement, then the
precondition for knowledge has been destroyed – then one has committed the
greatest crime against humanity. – Sin, to say it again, that form par excellence of
the self-violation of man, was invented to make science, culture, every kind of
elevation and nobility of man impossible; the priest rules through the invention of
sin. –

50

– At this point I cannot absolve myself from giving an account of the psychology of
‘belief, of ‘believers’, for the use, as is only reasonable, of precisely the ‘believers’
them selves. If there is today still no lack of those who do not know how indecent it
is to ‘believe’ – or a sign of décadence, of a broken will to live – well, they will
know it tomorrow. My voice reaches even the hard-of-hearing. – It appears, if I
have not misheard, that there exists among Christians a kind of criterion of truth
called ‘proof by potency’. ‘Belief makes blessed: therefore it is true.’ – One might
here object straight away that this making-blessed itself is not proved but only
promised: blessedness conditional upon ‘believing’ – one shall become blessed
because one believes…. But that what the priest promises the believer for a
‘Beyond’ inaccessible to any control actually occurs, how could that be proved? –
The alleged ‘proof by potency’ is therefore at bottom only a further belief that the
effect which one promises oneself from the belief will not fail to appear. In a
formula: ‘I believe that belief makes blessed – consequently it is true’. – But with
that we have already reached the end of the argument. This ‘consequently’ would be
the absurdum itself as a criterion of truth. – But if, with no little indulgence, we
suppose that the fact that belief makes blessed be regarded as proved (– not merely
desired, not merely promised by the somewhat suspect mouth of a priest): would
blessedness – more technically, pleasure – ever be a proof of truth? So little that it
provides almost the counterproof, at any rate the strongest suspicion against ‘truth’,
when feelings of pleasure enter into the answer to the question ‘what is true?’ The
proof by ‘pleasure’ is a proof of pleasure – that is all; when on earth was it
established that true judgements give more enjoyment than false ones and, in
accordance with a predetermined harmony, necessarily bring pleasant feelings in
their train? – The experience of all severe, all profound intellects teaches the
reverse. Truth has had to be fought for every step of the way, almost everything
else dear to our hearts, on which our love and our trust in life depend, has had to be
sacrificed to it. Greatness of soul is needed for it: the service of truth is the hardest
service. – For what does it mean to be honest in intellectual things? That one is
stern towards one’s heart, that one despises ‘fine feelings’, that one makes every
Yes and No a question of conscience! – Belief makes blessed: consequently it lies…

51
That under certain conditions belief makes blessed, that blessedness does not turn
an idée fixe into a true idea, that faith moves no mountains but surely places
mountains where there are none: a fleeting visit to a madhouse will provide ample
enlightenment on these things. Not, I admit, to a priest: for he denies by instinct that
sickness is sickness, that a madhouse is a madhouse. Christianity needs sickness
almost as much as Hellenism needs a superfluity of health – making sick is the true

hidden objective of the Church’s whole system of salvation procedures. And the
Church itself – is it not the Catholic madhouse as an ultimate ideal? – The whole
earth as a madhouse? – The religious man as the Church desires him to be is a
typical décadent; the moment when a religious crisis has gained the upper hand of a
people is always characterized by epidemics of neurosis; the ‘inner world’ of the
religious man is so like the ‘inner world’ of the over-excited and exhausted as to be
mistaken for it; the ‘highest’ states which Christianity has hung up over mankind as
the most valuable of all values are forms of epilepsy – the Church has canonized
only lunatics or great imposters in majorem death honorem.*… I once permitted
myself to describe the entire Christian penance-and-redemption training (which can
be studied best today in England) as a methodically induced folie circulaire,
naturally on a soil already prepared for it, that is to say a thoroughly morbid soil.
No one is free to become a Christian or not to do so; one is not ‘converted’ to
Christianity – one must be sufficiently sick for it…. We others, who have the
courage for health and also for contempt, what contempt we have for a religion
which teaches misunderstanding of the body! which does not wish to get rid of the
soul-superstition! which makes a ‘merit’ of eating too little! which combats health
as a kind of enemy, devil, temptation! which has persuaded itself that a ‘perfect
soul’ could be carried about in a cadaver of a body and to do so needed to concoct a
new conception of ‘perfection’, a pale, sickly, idiot-fanatic condition, so-called
‘holiness’ – holiness itself merely a symptom-syndrome of the impoverished,
enervated, incurably corrupted body!… As a European movement, the Christian
movement has been from the very first a collective movement of outcast and refuse
elements of every kind (– these want to come to power through Christianity). It is
not the expression of the decline of a race, it is an aggregate formation of décadence
types from everywhere crowding together and seeking one another out. It is not, as
is generally believed, the corruption of antiquity itself, of noble antiquity, which
made Christianity possible: the learned idiocy which even today maintains such a
thing cannot be contradicted too severely. The period in which the morbid, corrupt
Chandala classes of the entire Imperium were becoming Christian was precisely that
in which the opposing type, the nobility, existed in its fairest and maturest form.
The majority became master; the democratism of the Christian instincts
conquered…. Christianity was not ‘national’, not racially conditioned – it turned to
the disinherited of life of every kind, it had its allies everywhere. Christianity has at
its basis the rancune of the sick, the instinct directed against the healthy, against
health. Everything well-constituted, proud, high-spirited, beauty above all, is hurtful
to its ears and eyes. I recall again the invaluable saying of Paul: ‘God hath chosen
the weak things of the world, the foolish things of the world, base things of the
world and things which are despised’: that was the formula, in hoc signo décadence
conquered. – God on the Cross – is the fearful hidden meaning behind this symbol

still understood? – Everything that suffers, everything that hangs on the Cross, is
divine…. We all hang on the Cross, consequently we are divine…. We alone are
divine…. Christianity was a victory, a nobler disposition perished by it –
Christianity has been up till now mankind’s greatest misfortune. –

52
Christianity also stands in opposition to all intellectual well-constitutedness – it can
use only the morbid mind as the Christian mind, it takes the side of everything
idiotic, it proclaims a curse against the ‘spirit’, against the superbia of the healthy
spirit. Because sickness belongs to the essence of Christianity, the typical Christian
condition, ‘faith’, has to be a form of sickness, every straightforward, honest,
scientific road to knowledge has to be repudiated by the Church as a forbidden
road. Even to doubt is a sin…. The complete lack of psychological cleanliness in
the priest – it betrays itself in his glance – is a consequent phenomenon of
décadence – one can observe in hysterical women and rickety children how
regularly instinctive falsity, lying for the sake of lying, inability to look straight and
act straight, are expressions of décadence.’Faith’ means not wanting to know what
is true. The pietist, the priest of both sexes, is false because he is sick: his instinct
demands that truth shall not come into its own at any point. ‘What makes sick is
good; what proceeds from abundance, from superfluity, from power, is evil’: that is
what the believer feels. Compulsion to lie – in that I detect every predestined
theologian. – Another mark of the theologian is his incapacity for philology.
Philology is to be understood here in a very wide sense as the art of reading well –
of being able to read off a fact without falsifying it by interpretation, without losing
caution, patience, subtlety in the desire for understanding. Philology as ephexis* in
interpretation: whether it be a question of books, newspaper reports, fate or the
weather – to say nothing of the ‘salvation of the soul’…. The way in which a
theologian, no matter whether in Berlin or in Rome, interprets a ‘word of the
Scriptures’, or an experience, a victory of his country’s army for example, under the
higher illumination of the psalms of David, is always so audacious as to make a
philologist run up every wall in sight. And what on earth is he to do when pietists
and other cows out of Swabia dress up the pathetic commonplace and stuffiness of
their existence with the ‘finger of God’ into a miracle of ‘grace’, of ‘divine
providence’, of ‘experience of salvation’! Yet the most modest expenditure of
intelligence, not to say decency, would convince these interpreters of the complete
childishness and unworthiness of such an abuse of divine dexterity.* Even the
slightest trace of piety in us ought to make us feel that a God who cures a headcold
at the right moment or tells us to get into a coach just as a downpour is about to
start is so absurd a God he would have to be abolished even if he existed. A God as

a domestic servant, as a postman, as an almanac-maker – at bottom a word for the
stupidest kind of accidental occurrence…. ‘Divine providence’, as it is still believed
in today by almost every third person in ‘cultured Germany’, would be a stronger
objection to God than any other that could possibly be thought of. And in any case
it is an objection to the Germans!…

53
– That martyrs prove anything about the truth of a cause is so little true I would be
disposed to deny that a martyr has ever had anything whatever to do with truth. In
the tone with which a martyr throws his opinion at the world’s head there is already
expressed so low a degree of intellectual integrity, such obtuseness to the question
of ‘truth’, that one never needs to refute a martyr. Truth is not something one
person might possess and another not possess: peasants at the most, or peasant
apostles like Luther, could think of truth in this fashion. One may be certain that
modesty, moderation in intellectual matters, increases with the degree of
conscientiousness in them. To know five things and gently decline to know anything
else….’Truth’ as every prophet, every sectarian, every latitudinarian, every
Socialist, every Churchman understands the word, is conclusive proof that not so
much as a start has been made on that disciplining of the intellect and selfovercoming necessary for the discovery of any truth, even the very smallest. –
Martyrdoms, by the way, have been a great misfortune in history: they have
seduced…. The inference of all idiots, women and nations included, that a cause for
which someone is willing to die (not to speak of those which, like primitive
Christianity, produce epidemics of death-seeking) must have something in it – this
inference has become an unspeakable drag on verification, on the spirit of
verification and caution. Martyrs have harmed truth…. And even today a crude sort
of persecution is all that is required to create an honourable name for any sect, no
matter how indifferent in itself. – What? does the fact that someone gives up his life
for it change anything in the value of a cause? – An error which becomes
honourable is an error which possesses one seductive charm more: do you believe,
messieurs the theologians, that we would give you an opportunity of becoming
martyrs for your lies? – one refutes a thing by laying it respectfully on ice – just so
does one refute theologians too…. The world-historical stupidity of all persecutors
has lain precisely in giving their opponents the appearance of honourableness – in
bestowing on them the fascination of martyrdom…. Woman is today on her knees
before an error because she has been told someone died on the Cross for it. Is the
Cross then an argument? – But on all these things one man alone has said the word
that has been wanting for millennia – Zarathustra.
They wrote letters of blood on the path they followed and their folly taught that

truth is proved by blood.
But blood is the worst witness of truth; blood poisons and transforms the purest
teaching to delusion and hatred of the heart.
And if someone goes through fire for his teaching – what does that prove? Truly,
it is more when one’s own teaching comes out of one’s own burning!*

54
One should not let oneself be misled: great intellects are sceptics. Zarathustra is a
sceptic. The vigour of a mind, its freedom through strength and superior strength, is
proved by scepticism. Men of conviction simply do not come into consideration
where the fundamentals of value and disvalue are concerned. Convictions are
prisons. They do not see far enough, they do not see things beneath them: but to be
permitted to speak about value and disvalue one must see five hundred convictions
beneath one – behind one…. A spirit which wants to do great things, which also
wills the means for it, is necessarily a sceptic. Freedom from convictions of any
kind, the capacity for an unconstrained view, pertains to strength…. Grand passion,
the ground and force of his being, even more enlightened, more despotic than he
himself is, takes his whole intellect into its service; it makes him intrepid; it even
gives him the courage for unholy means; if need be it permits him convictions.
Conviction as a means: there is much one can achieve only by means of a
conviction. Grand passion uses and uses up convictions, it does not submit to them
– it knows itself sovereign. – Conversely: the need for belief, for some
unconditional Yes and No, Carlylism if I may be excused the expression, is a
requirement of weakness. The man of faith, the ‘believer’ of every sort is
necessarily a dependent man – such as cannot out of himself posit ends at all. The
‘believer’ does not belong to himself, he can be only a means, he has to be used, he
needs someone who will use him. His instinct accords the highest honour to a
morality of selflessness: everything persuades him to it, his intelligence, his
experience, his vanity. Belief of any kind is itself an expression of selflessness, of
self-alienation…. If one considers what need people have of an external regulation
to constrain and steady them, how compulsion, slavery in a higher sense, is the sole
and final condition under which the person of weaker will, woman especially, can
prosper; then one also understands the nature of conviction, ‘faith’. Conviction is
the backbone of the man of conviction. Not to see many things, not to be impartial
in anything, to be party through and through, to view all values from a strict and
necessary perspective – this alone is the condition under which such a man exists at
all. But he is thereby the antithesis, the antagonist of the truthful man – of truth….
The believer is not free to have a conscience at all over the question ‘true’ and
‘false’: to be honest on this point would mean his immediate destruction. The

pathological conditionality of his perspective makes of the convinced man a fanatic
– Savonarola, Luther, Rousseau, Robespierre, Saint-Simon – the antithetical type of
the strong, emancipated spirit. But the larger-than-life attitudes of these sick spirits,
these conceptual epileptics, impresses the great masses – fanatics are picturesque,
mankind would rather see gestures than listen to reasons…

55
– A further step in the psychology of conviction, of ‘belief. I suggested long ago
that convictions might be more dangerous enemies of truth than lies. This time I
should like to pose the decisive question: is there any difference whatever between a
lie and a conviction? – All the world believes there is, but what does all the world
not believe! – Every conviction has its history, its preliminary forms, its tentative
shapes, its blunders: it becomes a conviction after not being one for a long time,
after hardly being one for an even longer time. What? could the lie not be among
these embryonic forms of conviction? – Sometimes it requires merely a change in
persons: in the son that becomes conviction which in the father was still a lie. – I
call a lie: wanting not to see something one does see, wanting not to see something
as one sees it: whether the lie takes place before witnesses or without witnesses is
of no consequence. The most common lie is the lie one tells to oneself; lying to
others is relatively the exception. – Now this desiring not to see what one sees, this
desiring not to see as one sees, is virtually the primary condition for all who are in
any sense party: the party man necessarily becomes a liar. German historiography,
for example, is convinced that Rome was despotism, that the Teutons brought the
spirit of freedom into the world: what difference is there between this conviction
and a lie? Is there any further need to be surprised if all parties, German historians
included, instinctively have the big moral words in their mouths – that morality
continues to exist virtually because the party man of every sort has need of it every
moment? – ‘This is our conviction: we confess it before all the world, we live and
die for it – respect everything that has convictions!’ – I have heard this kind of thing
even from the lips of anti-Semites. On the contrary, gentlemen! An anti-Semite is
certainly not made more decent by the fact that he lies on principle…. The priests,
who are subtler in such things and understand very well the objection that can be
raised to the concept of a conviction, that is to say mendaciousness on principle
because serving a purpose, have taken over from the Jews the prudence of inserting
the concept ‘God’, ‘the will of God’, ‘the revelation of God’ in its place. Kant too,
with his categorical imperative, was on the same road: his reason became practical
in this matter. – There are questions whose truth or untruth cannot be decided by
man; all the supreme questions, all the supreme problems of value are beyond
human reason…. To grasp the limits of reason – only this is truly philosophy…. To

what end did God give mankind revelation? Would God have done anything
superfluous? Mankind cannot of itself know what is good and what evil, therefore
God taught mankind his will…. Moral: the priest does not lie – the question ‘true’
or ‘untrue’ does not arise in such things as priests speak of; these things do not
permit of lying at all. For in order to lie one would have to be able to decide what is
true here. But this is precisely what mankind cannot do; the priest is thus only
God’s mouthpiece. – This kind of priestly syllogism is by no means only Jewish
and Christian; the right to lie and the shrewdness of a ‘revelation’ pertains to the
type priest, to priests of décadence as much as to priests of paganism (– pagans are
all who say Yes to life, to whom ‘God’ is the word for the great Yes to all things). –
The ‘Law’, the ‘will of God’, the ‘sacred book’, ‘inspiration’ – all merely words for
the conditions under which the priest comes to power, by which he maintains his
power, these concepts are to be found at the basis of all priestly organizations, all
priestly or priestly-philosophical power-structures. The ‘holy lie’ – common to
Confucius, the Law-Book of Manu, Mohammed, the Christian Church – : it is not
lacking in Plato. ‘The truth exists’: this means, wherever it is heard, the priest is
lying…

56
– Ultimately the point is to what end a lie is told. That ‘holy’ ends are lacking in
Christianity is my objection to its means. Only bad ends: the poisoning, slandering,
denying of life, contempt for the body, the denigration and self-violation of man
through the concept sin – consequently its means too are bad. – It is with an
opposite feeling that I read the Law – Book of Manu, an incomparably spiritual and
superior work, so much as to name which in the same breath as the Bible would be
a sin against the spirit. One sees immediately that it has a real philosophy behind it,
in it, not merely an ill – smelling Jewish acidity compounded of rabbinism and
superstition – it gives even the most fastidious psychologist something to bite on.
Not forgetting the main thing, the basic difference from any sort of Bible: it is the
means by which the noble orders, the philosophers and the warriors, keep the mob
under control; noble values everywhere, a feeling of perfection, an affirmation of
life, a triumphant feeling of well-being in oneself and of goodwill towards life – the
sun shines on the entire book. – All the things upon which Christianity vents its
abysmal vulgarity, procreation for example, woman, marriage, are here treated
seriously, with reverence, with love and trust. How can one actually put into the
hands of women and children a book containing the low-minded saying: ‘To avoid
fornication let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband… for it is better to marry than burn’?* And is it allowable to be a Christian
as long as the origin of man is Christianized, that is to say dirtied, with the concept

of the immaculata conceptio?… I know of no book in which so many tender and
kind remarks are addressed to woman as in the Law-Book of Manu; these old
greybeards and saints have a way of being polite to women which has perhaps never
been surpassed. ‘A woman’s mouth’ – it says in one place – ‘a girl’s breast, a
child’s prayer, the smoke of a sacrifice are always pure’. Another passage: ‘There is
nothing purer than the light of the sun, the shadow of a cow, air, water, fire and a
girl’s breath.’ A final passage – perhaps also a holy lie – : ‘All the openings of the
body above the navel are pure, all below impure. Only in the case of a girl is the
whole body pure.’

57
One catches the unholiness of the Christian means in flagranti when one compares
the Christian purpose with the purpose of the Manu Law-Book – when one throws a
bright light on this greatest of antitheses of purpose. The critic of Christianity
cannot be spared the task of making Christianity contemptible. – Such a law-book
as that of Manu originates as does every good law-book: it summarizes the
experience, policy and experimental morality of long centuries, it settles accounts, it
creates nothing new. The precondition for a codification of this sort is the insight
that the means of endowing with authority a truth slowly and expensively acquired
are fundamentally different from those by which one would demonstrate it. A lawbook never tells of the utility of a law, of the reason for it, of the casuistry which
preceded it: for in that way it would lose the imperative tone, the ‘thou shalt’, the
precondition of being obeyed. The problem lies precisely in this. – At a certain
point in the evolution of a people its most enlightened, that is to say most reflective
and far-sighted, class declares the experience in accordance with which the people
is to live – that is, can live – to be fixed and settled. Their objective is to bring
home the richest and completest harvest from the ages of experimentation and bad
experience. What, consequently, is to be prevented above all is the continuation of
experimenting, the perpetuation in infinitum of the fluid condition of values, tests,
choices, criticizing of values. A two-fold wall is erected against this: firstly
revelation, that is the assertion that the reason for these laws is not of human origin,
was not sought and found slowly and with many blunders, but, being of divine
origin, is whole, perfect, without history, a gift, a miracle, merely communicated….
Then tradition, that is, the assertion that the law has already existed from time
immemorial, that it is impious, a crime against the ancestors, to call it in question.
The authority of the law is established by the thesis: God gave it, the ancestors lived
it. – The higher rationale of such a procedure lies in the intention of gradually
making the way of life recognized as correct (that is demonstrated by a tremendous
amount of finely-sifted experience) unconscious: so that a complete automatism of

instinct is achieved – the precondition for any kind of mastery, any kind of
perfection in the art of living. To set up a law-book of the kind of Manu means to
concede to a people the right henceforth to become masterly, to become perfect – to
be ambitious for the highest art of living. To that end the law must be made
unconscious: this is the purpose of every holy lie. – The order of castes, the
supreme, the dominating law, is only the sanctioning of a natural order, a natural
law of the first rank over which no arbitrary caprice, no ‘modern idea’ has any
power. In every healthy society, there can be distinguished three types of man of
divergent physiological tendency which mutually condition one another and each of
which possesses its own hygiene, its own realm of work, its own sort of mastery
and feeling of perfection. Nature, not Manu, separates from one another the
predominantly spiritual type, the predominantly muscular and temperamental type,
and the third type distinguished neither in the one nor the other, the mediocre type –
the last as the great majority, the first as the élite. The highest caste – I call it the
very few – possesses, as the perfect caste, also the privileges of the very few: among
them is that of representing happiness, beauty, benevolence on earth. Only the most
spiritual human beings are permitted beauty, beautiful things: only in their case is
benevolence not weakness. Pulchrum est paucorum hominum: the good is a
privilege. On the other hand, nothing is more strictly forbidden them than ugly
manners or a pessimistic outlook, an eye that makes ugly – to say nothing of
indignation at the collective aspect of things. Indignation is the privilege of the
Chandala; pessimism likewise. ‘The world is perfect’ – thus speaks the instinct of
the most spiritual, the affirmative instinct – : ‘imperfection, everything beneath us,
distance between man and man, the pathos of this distance, the Chandala
themselves pertain to this perfection’. The most spiritual human beings, as the
strongest, find their happiness where others would find their destruction: in the
labyrinth, in severity towards themselves and others, in attempting; their joy lies in
self-constraint: with them asceticism becomes nature, need, instinct. They consider
the hard task a privilege, to play with vices which overwhelm others a recreation….
Knowledge – a form of asceticism. – They are the most venerable kind of human
being: this does not exclude their being the most cheerful, the most amiable. They
rule not because they want to but because they are; they are not free to be second in
rank. – The second in rank: these are the guardians of the law, the keepers of order
and security; the noble warriors; above all the king as the highest formula of
warrior, judge and upholder of the law. The second in rank are the executives of the
most spiritual order, the closest to them who relieve them of everything coarse in
the work of ruling – their following, their right hand, their best pupils. – In all this,
to say it again, there is nothing capricious, nothing ‘artificial’; whatever is different
from this is artificial – nature is then confounded…. The order of castes, order of
rank, only formulates the supreme law of life itself; the separation of the three types

is necessary for the preservation of society, for making possible higher and higher
types – inequality of rights is the condition for the existence of rights at all. – A
right is a privilege. The privilege of each is determined by the nature of his being.
Let us not underestimate the privileges of the mediocre. Life becomes harder and
harder as it approaches the heights – the coldness increases, the responsibility
increases. A high culture is a pyramid: it can stand only on a broad base, its very
first prerequisite is a strongly and soundly consolidated mediocrity. The crafts,
trade, agriculture, science, the greater part of art, in a word the entire compass of
professional activity, are in no way compatible with anything other than mediocrity
in ability and desires; these things would be out of place among the élite, the
instinct pertaining to them is as much opposed to aristocracy as it is to anarchy. To
be a public utility, a cog, a function, is a natural vocation, it is not society, it is the
kind of happiness of which the great majority are alone capable, which makes
intelligent machines of them. For the mediocre it is happiness to be mediocre;
mastery in one thing, specialization, is for them a natural instinct. It would be quite
unworthy of a more profound mind to see an objection in mediocrity as such. It is
even the prime requirement for the existence of exceptions; a high culture is
conditional upon it. When an exceptional human being handles the mediocre more
gently than he does himself or his equals, this is not mere politeness of the heart* –
it is simply his duty…. Whom among today’s rabble do I hate the most? The
Socialist rabble, the Chandala apostles who undermine the worker’s instinct, his
pleasure, his feeling of contentment with his little state of being – who make him
envious, who teach him revengefulness…. Injustice never lies in unequal rights, it
lies in the claim to ‘equal’ rights…. What is bad? But I have already answered that
question: everything that proceeds from weakness, from envy, from revengefulness.
– The anarchist and the Christian have a common origin…

58
It does indeed make a difference for what purpose one lies: whether one preserves
with a lie or destroys with it. One may assert an absolute equivalence between
Christian and anarchist: their purpose, their instinct is set only on destruction. For
the proof of this proposition one has only to read history, which displays it with
frightful clarity. If we have just now examined a religious legislation the purpose of
which was to ‘eternalize’ a grand organization of society, the supreme condition for
the prosperity of life – Christianity discovered its mission in making an end of just
such an organization because life prospered within it. There the revenue of reason
from long ages of experimentation and uncertainty was to be employed for the
benefit of the most distant future and the biggest, richest, most complete harvest
possible brought home: here, on the contrary, the harvest was poisoned overnight….

That which stood aere perennius, the Imperium Romanum, the most grandiose form
of organization under difficult conditions which has hitherto been achieved, in
comparison with which everything before and everything since is patchwork,
bungling, dilettantism – these holy anarchists made it an ‘act of piety’ to destroy
‘the world’, that is to say the Imperium Romanum, until not one stone was left
standing on another – until even Teutons and other such ruffians could become
master of it…. The Christian and the anarchist: both décadents, both incapable of
producing anything but dissolution, poisoning, degeneration, both bloodsuckers,
both with the instinct of deadly hatred towards everything that stands erect, that
towers grandly up, that possesses duration, that promises life a future….
Christianity was the vampire of the Imperium Romanum – the tremendous deed of
the Romans in clearing the ground for a great culture which could take its time was
undone overnight by Christianity. – Is this still not understood? The Imperium
Romanum which we know, which the history of the Roman province teaches us to
know better and better, this most admirable of all works of art in the grand style,
was a beginning, its structure was calculated to prove itself by millennia – to this
day there has never been such building, to build in such a manner sub specie aeterni
has never been so much as dreamed of! – This organization was firm enough to
endure bad emperors: the accident of persons must have no effect on such things –
first principle of all grand architecture. But it was not firm enough to endure the
corruptest form of corruption, to endure the Christian…. These stealthy vermin
which, shrouded in night, fog and ambiguity crept up to every individual and
sucked seriousness for real things, the instinct for realities of any kind, out of him,
this cowardly, womanish and honeyed crew gradually alienated the ‘souls’ of this
tremendous structure – those precious, those manly-noble natures who found their
own cause, their own seriousness, their own pride in the cause of Rome. This
underhanded bigotry, conventicle secrecy, gloomy concepts such as Hell, such as
the sacrifice of the innocent, such as the unio mystica in blood-drinking, above all
the slowly stirred-up fire of revengefulness, of Chandala revengefulness – that is
what became master of Rome, the same species of religion on whose antecedent
form Epicurus had already made war. One must read Lucretius to understand what
it was Epicurus opposed: not paganism but ‘Christianity’, which is to say the
corruption of souls through the concept of guilt, punishment and immortality. – He
opposed the subterranean cults, the whole of latent Christianity – to deny
immortality was already in those days a real redemption. – And Epicurus would
have won, every mind of any account in the Roman Empire was an Epicurean: then
Paul appeared…. Paul, Chandala hatred against Rome, against ‘the world’, become
flesh and genius, the Jew, the eternal Jew* par excellence…. What he divined was
that with the aid of the little sectarian movement on the edge of Judaism one could
ignite a ‘world conflagration’, that with the symbol ‘God on the Cross’ one could

sum up everything down-trodden, everything in secret revolt, the entire heritage of
anarchist agitation in the Empire into a tremendous power. ‘Salvation is of the
Jews.’ – Christianity as the formula for outbidding all the subterranean cults, those
of Osiris, of the Great Mother, of Mithras for example – and for summing them up:
it is in this insight that the genius of Paul consists. His instinct in this matter was so
sure that, doing ruthless violence to the truth, he took the ideas by which those
Chandala religions exercised their fascination and placed them in the mouth of the
‘Saviour’ he had invented, and not only in his mouth – so as to make of him
something even a priest of Mithras could understand…. This was his vision on the
road to Damascus: he grasped that to disvalue ‘the world’ he needed the belief in
immortality, that the concept ‘Hell’ will master even Rome – that with the ‘Beyond’
one kills life…. Nihilist and Christian: they rhyme,* and do not merely rhyme…

59
The whole labour of the ancient world in vain: I have no words to express my
feelings at something so dreadful. – And considering its labour was a preparation,
that only the substructure for a labour of millennia had, with granite selfconfidence, been laid, the whole meaning of the ancient world in vain!… Why did
the Greeks exist? Why the Romans? – Every prerequisite for an erudite culture, all
the scientific methods were already there, the great, the incomparable art of reading
well had already been established – the prerequisite for a cultural tradition, for a
uniform science; natural science, in concert with mathematics and mechanics, was
on the best possible road – the sense for facts, the last-developed and most valuable
of all the senses, had its schools and its tradition already centuries old! Is this
understood? Everything essential for setting to work had been devised – methods,
one must repeat ten times, are the essential, as well as being the most difficult, as
well as being that which has habit and laziness against it longest. What we have
won back for ourselves today with an unspeakable amount of self-constraint – for
we all still have bad instincts, the Christian instincts, somewhere within us – the
free view of reality, the cautious hand, patience and seriousness in the smallest
things, the whole integrity of knowledge – was already there! already more than two
millennia ago! And good and delicate taste and tact! Not as brain training! Not as
‘German’ culture with the manners of ruffians! But as body, as gesture, as instinct –
in a word, as reality…. All in vain! Overnight merely a memory! – Greeks!
Romans! nobility of instinct, of taste, methodical investigation, genius for
organization and government, the faith in, the will to a future for mankind, the great
Yes to all things, visibly present to all the senses as the Imperium Romanum, grand
style no longer merely art but become reality, truth, life…. And not overwhelmed
overnight by a natural event! Not trampled down by Teutons and other such

clodhoppers! But ruined by cunning, secret, invisible, anaemic vampires! Not
conquered – only sucked dry!… Covert revengefulness, petty envy become master !
Everything pitiful, everything suffering from itself, everything tormented by base
feelings, the whole ghetto-world of the soul suddenly on top! – One has only to read
any of the Christian agitators, Saint Augustine for example, to realize, to smell,
what dirty fellows had therewith come out on top. One would be deceiving oneself
utterly if one presupposed a lack of intelligence of any sort on the part of the leaders
of the Christian movement – oh they are shrewd, shrewd to the point of holiness,
these Church Fathers! What they lack is something quite different. Nature was
neglectful when she made them – she forgot to endow them with even a modest
number of respectable, decent, cleanly instincts…. Between ourselves, they are not
even men.… If Islam despises Christianity, it is a thousand times right to do so:
Islam presupposes men…

60
Christianity robbed us of the harvest of the culture of the ancient world, it later went
on to rob us of the harvest of the culture of Islam. The wonderful Moorish cultural
world of Spain, more closely related to us at bottom, speaking more directly to our
senses and taste, than Greece and Rome, was trampled down (– I do not say by
what kind of feet –): why? because it was noble, because it owed its origin to manly
instincts, because it said Yes to life even in the rare and exquisite treasures of
Moorish life!… Later on, the Crusaders fought against something they would have
done better to lie down in the dust before – a culture compared with which even our
nineteenth century may well think itself very impoverished and very ‘late’. – They
wanted booty, to be sure: the Orient was rich…. But let us not be prejudiced! The
Crusades – higher piracy, that is all! German knighthood, Viking knighthood at
bottom, was there in its element: the Church knew only too well what German
knighthood can be had for…. The German knights, always the ‘Switzers’ of the
Church, always in the service of all the bad instincts of the Church – but well
paid…. That it is precisely with the aid of German swords, German blood and
courage, that the Church has carried on its deadly war against everything noble on
earth! A host of painful questions arises at this point. The German aristocracy is
virtually missing in the history of higher culture: one can guess the reason….
Christianity, alcohol – the two great means of corruption…. For in itself there
should be no choice in the matter when faced with Islam and Christianity, as little
as there should when faced with an Arab and a Jew. The decision is given in
advance; no one is free to choose here. One either is Chandala or one is not…. ‘War
to the knife with Rome! Peace, friendship with Islam’: this is what that great free
spirit, the genius among German emperors, Friedrich the Second, felt, this is what

he did. What? does a German have to be a genius, a free spirit, before he can have
decent feelings? How a German could ever have felt Christian escapes me…

61
Here it is necessary to touch on a memory a hundred times more painful for
Germans. The Germans have robbed Europe of the last great cultural harvest
Europe had to bring home – of the harvest of Renaissance. Is it at last understood,
is there a desire to understand, what the Renaissance was? The revaluation of
Christian values, the attempt, undertaken with every expedient, with every instinct,
with genius of every kind, to bring about the victory of the opposing values, the
noble values…. Up till now this has been the only great war, there has been no
more decisive interrogation than that conducted by the Renaissance – the question it
asks is the question I ask – : neither has there been a form of attack more
fundamental, more direct, and more strenuously delivered on the entire front and at
the enemy’s centre! To attack at the decisive point, in the very seat of Christianity,
to set the noble values on the throne, which is to say to set them into the instincts,
the deepest needs and desires of him who sits thereon…. I see in my mind’s eye a
possibility of a quite unearthly fascination and splendour – it seems to glitter with a
trembling of every refinement of beauty, there seems to be at work in it an art so
divine, so diabolically divine, that one might scour the millennia in vain for a
second such possibility; I behold a spectacle at once so meaningful and so strangely
paradoxical it would have given all the gods of Olympus an opportunity for an
immortal roar of laughter – Cesare Borgia as Pope…. Am I understood?… Very
well, that would have been a victory of the only sort I desire today – : Christianity
would thereby have been abolished! – What happened? A German monk, Luther,
went to Rome. This monk, all the vindictive instincts of a failed priest in him,
fulminated in Rome against the Renaissance…. Instead of grasping with profound
gratitude the tremendous event which had taken place, the overcoming of
Christianity in its very seat – his hatred grasped only how to nourish itself on this
spectacle. The religious man thinks only of himself. – What Luther saw was the
corruption of the Papacy, while precisely the opposite was palpably obvious: the
old corruption, the peccatum originale, Christianity no longer sat on the Papal
throne! Life sat there instead! the triumph of life! the great Yes to all lofty,
beautiful, daring things!… And Luther restored the Church: he attacked it…. The
Renaissance – an event without meaning, a great in vain! – Oh these Germans, what
they have already cost us! In vain – that has always been the work of the Germans.
– The Reformation; Leibniz; Kant and so-called German philosophy; the Wars of
‘Liberation’; the Reich – each time an in vain for something already in existence,
for something irretrievable…. They are my enemies, I confess it, these Germans: I

despise in them every kind of uncleanliness of concept and value, of cowardice in
the face of every honest Yes and No. For almost a millennium they have twisted
and tangled everything they have laid their hands on, they have on their conscience
all the half-heartedness – three-eighths-heartedness! – from which Europe is sick –
they also have on their conscience the uncleanest kind of Christianity there is, the
most incurable kind, the kind hardest to refute, Protestantism.… If we never get rid
of Christianity, the Germans will be to blame…

62
– With that I have done and pronounce my judgement. I condemn Christianity, I
bring against the Christian Church the most terrible charge any prosecutor has ever
uttered. To me it is the extremest thinkable form of corruption, it has had the will to
the ultimate corruption conceivably possible. The Christian Church has left nothing
untouched by its depravity, it has made of every value a disvalue, of every truth a
lie, of every kind of integrity a vileness of soul. People still dare to talk to me of its
‘humanitarian’ blessings! To abolish any state of distress whatever has been
profoundly inexpedient to it: it has lived on states of distress, it has created states of
distress in order to eternalize itself…. The worm of sin, for example: it was only the
Church which enriched mankind with this state of distress! – ‘Equality of souls
before God’, this falsehood, this pretext for the rancune of all the base-minded, this
explosive concept which finally became revolution, modern idea and the principle
of the decline of the entire social order – is Christian dynamite…. ‘Humanitarian’
blessings of Christianity! To cultivate out of humanitas a self-contradiction, an art
of self-violation, a will to falsehood at any price, an antipathy, a contempt for every
good and honest instinct! These are the blessings of Christianity! – Parasitism as the
sole practice of the Church; with its ideal of green-sickness, of ‘holiness’ draining
away all blood, all love, all hope for life; the Beyond as the will to deny reality of
every kind; the Cross as the badge of recognition for the most subterranean
conspiracy there has ever been – a conspiracy against health, beauty, wellconstitutedness, bravery, intellect, benevolence of soul, against life itself…
Wherever there are walls I shall inscribe this eternal accusation against
Christianity upon them – I can write in letters which make even the blind see.… I
call Christianity the one great curse, the one great intrinsic depravity, the one great
instinct for revenge for which no expedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret,
subterranean, petty – I call it the one immortal blemish of mankind…
And one calculates time from the dies nefastus* on which this fatality arose –
from the first day of Christianity! – Why not rather from its last? – From today? –
Revaluation of all values!

Glossary of Names
ARISTOTLE (384–322 BC) Nietzsche has only a slight interest in Aristotle, and his

main concern with him is to refute his conception of tragedy as catharsis; the
‘magnanimous’ man of the Nicomachaean Ethics, however, is very like
Nietzsche’s Übermensch.
AUGUSTINE (354–430) ‘These have mastered Christianity:… Platonism

(Augustine)….’ (Will to Power 214); utterly unable to live in the manner of
Jesus, Augustine employed Christianity as a vehicle for his own ideology in the
manner of Paul.
BAUDELAIRE, Charles (1821–67) ‘Who was the first intelligent supporter of

Wagner? Charles Baudelaire….’ (Ecce Homo II 5): Nietzsche’s interest in
Baudelaire, such as it is, is part of his interest in proving that Wagner was at
bottom a French décadent.
BORGIA, Cesare (d. 1507) ‘Borgia’ is an ideogram for the man of strong but

unsublimated will to power, the ‘blond beast’, who is not ‘improved’ when he is
tamed.
BUCKLE, Henry Thomas (1821–62) Historian, author of the unfinished History of

Civilization in which he expounds his ideas on the general laws which govern the
evolution of human societies. His reputation formerly stood much higher than it
does now: in the Genealogy of Morals (1, 4) Nietzsche attacks the ‘plebeianism
of the modern spirit’ as manifested in the ‘notorious case of Buckle’.
BURCKHARDT, Jacob (1818–97) Historian, best known for his Civilization of the

Renaissance in Italy. He was an elder colleague of Nietzsche’s at Basel university
and Nietzsche retained a great admiration for him.
CAESAR, Julius (101–44 BC) In Nietzsche’s works, Caesar is dehistoricized into an

ideogram for the man of sublimated will to power (compare Borgia). Nietzsche
does admire Caesar, but not specifically as a general and certainly not because he
was a general (compare Napoleon).
CARLYLE, Thomas (1795–1881) In an aphorism in Dawn called ‘The cult of hero-

worship and its fanatics’ (298), Nietzsche says of one who idealizes another that
he ‘sets this person at so great a distance from himself that he can no longer see
him clearly – and then he reinterprets what he still sees into the “beautiful”,
which is to say the symmetrical, soft-lined, indefinite.’ The two men he accuses
of doing this, Byron and Carlyle, are both as it happens Scotsmen, and it was
another Scotsman, Thomas Campbell, who provided the formula for this kind of

perspective in the lines, ‘’Tis distance lends enchantment to the view, And robes
the mountain in its azure hue’ and thereby defined a good part of ‘Romanticism’.
To Nietzsche, Carlyle was a ‘typical Romantic’.
CATILINE, Lucius Sergius (c. 109–62 BC) Unsuccessful conspiracy against the
Senate 63–2 BC: his feelings towards that body are likened to Caesar’s, his

handling of that body contrasted with Caesar’s.
COMTE, Auguste (1798–1857) French philosopher, author of the Cours de

philosophie positive (1830–42). Comte was for Nietzsche the great ‘embracer and
conqueror of the pure sciences’ who at the end of his life allowed his scientific
strictness to evaporate into ‘poetical mist and mystic lights’ (Dawn 542).
CORNARO, Luigi (1467–1566) After surviving a nearly fatal illness at forty, he

advocated a sparing diet as a recipe for health and long life. ‘In later life he found
one egg a day sufficient solid food.’ (Encyclopedia Britannica). His book,
Discorsi sulla vita sobria (1558), was a best-seller in many languages.
DANTE ALIGHIERI (1265–1321) The scattered references to Dante in Nietzsche’s

works are highly contradictory.
DARWIN, Charles (1809–82) Confrontation with Darwin is a major motif of

Nietzsche’s philosophy passim. There are four main points at issue: (i) in so far
as ‘Darwinism’ means the theory of evolution it is ‘true but deadly’ because it
proves that mankind is a continuation of the animals and that human life is
therefore deprived of any special significance; Nietzsche’s hypothesis of
sublimated will to power is designed to restore a distinction between man and
animal; (ii) in so far as Darwinism is the theory of evolution by natural selection
brought about by a ‘struggle for survival’ it is, Nietzsche maintains, untrue,
because it presupposes a niggardliness and state of chronic distress in nature
which does not exist, the state of nature being on the contrary ‘one of superfluity
and prodigality, even to the point of absurdity’ (The Gay Science 349: the
unconscious influence on Darwin’s theory of the condition of nineteenth-century
England and of Victorian middle-class thriftiness and money-mindedness in
general is now, I think, generally recognized); (iii) in as much as the effects
accounted for by the hypothesis of a will to aggrandizement include those
accounted for by the hypothesis of a ‘will to survive’ this latter hypothesis is
superfluous; (iv) when a ‘struggle for survival’ does take place its outcome is not
that implied by the theory of natural selection, that is to say it is not a higher type
which emerges victorious.
DEMOCRITUS (flourished c. 420 BC) Greek philosopher, the founder, with

Leucippus, of atomism. Nietzsche’s attitude towards Democritus’ atomism is

instructive: he approves of its materialism and of the fact that it can get along
without any teleology, but he sees that it is very far from being the complete
victory over Parmenides its advocates took it to be: the projection of the notion of
a ‘subject’ from the individual on to the outside world, where it assumes the
shape of a ‘thing’, is certainly not done away with in atomism, for the ‘atom’ is a
‘thing’. The mechanistic idea of atoms as solid objects like billiard balls was
instinctively rejected by Nietzsche: and in Human, All Too Human (19) he wrote:
‘the whole procedure of science has been pursuing the task of resolving
everything thing-like (material) into motions.’
DESCARTES, René (1596–1650) In his relatively few references to Descartes,

Nietzsche is chiefly concerned to question the validity of Descartes’ dictum
cogito, ergo sum, mainly by way of analysing the proposition ‘I think’. This has
less to do with Descartes himself than with Nietzsche’s general polemic against
‘the foisting on of a “subject”’.
DOSTOYEVSKY, Fyodor (1821–81) ‘A few weeks ago I did not even know the

name of Dostoyevsky…. A chance reach in a bookshop brought to my notice a
work just translated into French, L’ esprit souterrain [Notes from Underground]
… The instinct of kinship (or what shall I call it?) spoke immediately, my joy
was extraordinary: I have to go back to my becoming acquainted with Stendhal’s
Rouge et Noir to recall another such joy.’ (Letter of 23 February 1887.) By 7
March he had also read The House of the Dead and The Insulted and Injured,
both likewise in French translation. Whether he read all or any of the four great
novels is unknown: in view of his continued enthusiasm for Dostoyevsky his
failure to mention any of them in his considerable correspondence of 1887 and
1888 suggests he did not, although one is almost compelled to conclude that the
employment of the word ‘idiot’ to describe Jesus, as well as its rather frequent
employment in the works in 1888 in general, derives from a knowledge of
Dostoyevsky’s The Idiot: certainly an awareness of what Dostoyevsky means by
that term helps us to understand why Nietzsche should have used it. Since he was
twenty-three years younger than Dostoyevsky and produced many of his books
after Dostoyevsky was dead, it is important to note how late it was before he
came to read him: what suggests Dostoyevsky in Nietzsche’s writings before
1887 is not the product of influence or borrowing but of a similarity in
psychological acumen.
ELIOT, George (Mary Ann Evans, 1819–80) Nietzsche’s friend Helene Druscowicz

was a great admirer of George Eliot, wrote about her and talked to Nietzsche
about her. Fräulein Druscowicz could read English (she translated Swinburne into
German), Nietzsche could not, or only very haltingly, and it seems likely he

knew of George Eliot mainly from her: he clearly thought of Eliot mainly as an
English free-thinker. The reference to her in Twilight is the only one in
Nietzsche’s works.
EMERSON, Ralph Waldo (1803–82) Aphorism 92 of The Gay Science, on the

relation between poetry and prose, names the only four ‘masters of prose’ of the
nineteenth century (Goethe being considered a product of the eighteenth):
Leoparth, Mérimée, Emerson and Landor. Whatever one may think of this
judgement, and of its somewhat narrow conception of what constitutes good
prose, it provides evidence of Nietzsche’s extreme admiration for Emerson. The
original edition of The Gay Science (1882) is prefaced by a quotation from
Emerson, and he admired Emerson longer and with greater consistency than he
did any other contemporary writer: his holiday programme for 1862 included
making extracts from all Emerson’s essays (no record of whether he actually did
so) and his enthusiasm is just as great in 1888.
EPICURUS (341–270 BC) Greek philosopher, adopted the physics and the ethical

teaching of Democritus and made of the latter the influential moral doctrine
named after him. For Nietzsche, ‘the garden god’ Epicurus is a mood rather than
a man: aphorism 295 of The Wanderer and his Shadow, in which Epicurus is
called ‘one of the greatest human beings, the inventor of an heroic-idyllic mode
of philosophizing’, is a description of this mood.
FONTENELLE, Bernard Le Bovier de (1657–1757) French writer. He appears here

as a representative of the group of six – the others are Montaigne, La
Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère, Vauve-nargues and Chamfort – of whom Nietzsche
says (The Wanderer and his Shadow 214) that one is closer to antiquity when
reading them than with any similar group of any other nation: ‘Their books…
contain more actual ideas than all the books of German philosophers put
together.’
FRIEDRICH THE SECOND (1194–1250) King of Sicily from 1198, king of

Germany from 1212, ‘emperor of the West’ from 1220; continually in conflict
with the Papacy; although excommunicated he took part in the sixth crusade,
when he negotiated with the Mohammedans instead of fighting them and gained
the city of Jerusalem without bloodshed. His court in Sicily was possibly the
most cultured spot in Europe, and Friedrich himself, although the ‘German
Christian emperor’, was more of a Mohammedan than a Christian and more of an
Italian than a German. The need to be continually on the defensive against the
forces of the Pope produced a deterioration in his character in later years which
ended in a species of persecution mania. Nietzsche’s admiration for him is
unqualified and it is interesting to see why: ‘the first European according to my

taste’ (Beyond Good and Evil 200) he calls him at the end of a discussion of the
possibility that higher types of men are produced as a consequence of racial
mixture: it is Friedrich’s cosmopolitan culture which Nietzsche admires, the
‘good European’. (In expressing his admiration for Friedrich the Second
Nietzsche is probably also expressing his lack of admiration for the traditionally
admired Friedrich the First, called Barbarossa.)
GOETHE, Johann Wolfgang (1749–1832) The modern man Nietzsche admired most

and the one who provided him with a yardstick against which he measured the
achievements of other men; a type of the Übermensch or ‘Dionysian man’. The
description of Goethe in ‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’ 49 defines the
Übermensch more succinctly than any other single passage in Nietzsche’s works.
GONCOURT, Edmond (1822–96) and Jules (1830–70) French writers of the

naturalist school. ‘The second volume of the journal des Goncourts has
appeared… in it are described in the most vivid way the celebrated diners chez
Magny, those dinners which brought together every fortnight the wittiest and
most sceptical company of Parisian spirits of the time (Sainte-Beuve, Flaubert,
Théophile Gautier, Taine, Renan, the Goncourts, Schérer, Gavarni, occasionally
Turgenev, etc.). Exasperated pessimism, cynicism, nihilism, alternating with
much boisterousness and good humour; I myself wouldn’t be at all out of place
there – I know these gentlemen inside out, so well that I have really had enough
of them already. One has to be more radical: fundamentally they all lack the main
thing – “la force”.’ (Letter of 10 November 1887).
HARTMANN, Eduard von (1842–1906) German philosopher, author of Philosophy

of the Unconscious. Often referred to by Nietzsche, always with contempt.
HEGEL, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770–1831) Nietzsche’s relation to Hegel is

complex and cannot be satisfactorily described in a note. Two things can be
noted, however: (i) Nietzsche’s basic attitude towards Hegel was that his
philosophy was the conceptual basis of modern ‘evolutionism’ and thus
encouraged a habit of mind which ought to be deprecated; (ii) Nietzsche clearly
did not study Hegel very profoundly and was in many ways closer to him than he
suspected, although he acknowledged that ‘we Germans would be Hegelians even
if Hegel had never existed, in as much as we instinctively accord a profounder
significance and a greater value to becoming and evolution than we do to that
which “is”….’ (The Gay Science 357.)
HEINE, Heinrich (1797–1856) German-Jewish poet and writer. ‘The highest

conception of the lyric poet was given me by Heinrich Heine. I seek in vain in all
the realms of the millennia for an equally sweet arid passionate music. He

possessed that divine malice without which I cannot conceive the perfect. – I
estimate the value of human beings, of races, according to how necessarily they
do not know how to understand the god apart from the satyr. – And how he
handles German! It will one day be said that Heine and I have been by far the
greatest artists of the German language…’ (Ecce Homo II 4.)
HERACLITUS (c. 500 BC) Greek philosopher. Because of his dynamic view of

nature much admired by Nietzsche. In his pride and isolation, and the sibylline
character of his utterances, he is the ultimate model for Zarathustra.
HORACE (Quintus Horatius Flaccus, 65–8 BC) Often quoted by Nietzsche,

although sometimes the quotations are only familiar tags, e.g. aereperennius.
HUGO, Victor (1802–85) ‘Victor Hugo and Richard Wagner – they signify one and

the same thing: that in declining cultures, that wherever the decision comes to
rest with the masses, genuineness becomes superfluous, disadvantageous, an
encumbrance. Only the actor still arouses great enthusiasm.’ (The Wagner Case
II.)
KANT, Emmanuel (1724–1804) There are scores of references to Kant in

Nietzsche’s works, and the greater part of them are hostile. What Nietzsche held
against Kant can, however, be stated in a single sentence: that Kant believed in
and sought to demonstrate the existence of a ‘moral world-order’.
LEIBNIZ, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646–1716) Nietzsche credits Leibniz with and

praises him for the discovery that ‘what we call consciousness constitutes only a
condition of our spiritual and psychical world (perhaps a morbid condition) and is
very far from constituting this world itself’ (The Gay Science 357): the connexion
with Nietzsche’s speculations will be clear. Otherwise he has little interest in
Leibniz.
LISZT, Franz (1811–86), ‘who excels all other musicians in the nobility of his

orchestral tone’ (Ecce Homo II 7) – but because he was Wagner’s father-in-law
Nietzsche cannot resist making jokes about him. Liszt was, of course, very much
an ‘actor’ in Nietzsche’s sense of the word.
LOBECK, Christian August (1781–1860) German philologist and antiquary; a

specialist in the history of the Greek language. He wrote many scholarly works.
LUTHER, Martin (1483–1546) The long polemic in The Anti-Christ against ‘faith’

as the distinguishing characteristic of the Christian expresses what lies behind
Nietzsche’s long-standing enmity towards Luther: emphasis on ‘faith’ is merely a
confession of incapacity for ‘works’. Nietzsche also continually emphasizes
Luther’s coarseness and his enmity towards reason.

MACHIAVELLI, Niccolò (1469–1527) Admired by Nietzsche for his ‘realism’; but

Nietzsche refers to him very infrequently and there seems no good reason for
linking their names as is sometimes done.
MALTHUS, Thomas Robert (1766–1834) ‘Population, when unchecked, increases

in a geometrical ratio. Subsistence only increases in an arithmetical ratio… the
power of population is indefinitely greater than the power in the earth to produce
subsistence for man.’ (Essay on the Principle of Population [1798].)
MICHELET, Jules (1798–1874) Historian of France and of the Revolution.

Nietzsche links him with Schiller and Carlyle as an idealizing historian. (Will to
Power 343.)
MILL, John Stuart (1806–74) Very few references to Mill in Nietzsche’s works, but

many hostile ones to ‘utilitarianism’, which was especially Mill’s ethical theory.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE (1769–1821) Not, despite occasional suggestions to the

contrary, a type of the Übermensch, but a ‘synthesis of Unmensch [monster] and
Übermensch’ (Genealogy of Morals I 16) – that is to say, a ‘problem’. Nietzsche
worries this problem of Napoleon from the beginning of his life till the end, but
arrives at no definite conclusion. Many of his statements about Napoleon are
neutral as regards ‘admiration’ or ‘dislike’: they seek to describe. He shows no
interest in his military campaigns and his assessment of him does not involve
consideration of his generalship.
PASCAL, Blaise (1623–62) French mathematician and philosopher. At the age of

sixteen he wrote a treatise on conic sections and at eighteen invented a computer;
later he invented, among other things, the calculus of probability and the
hydraulic press. On the night of 23 November 1654 he suffered a mystical
‘conversion’ to religious belief and from then on frequented Port-Royal and
devoted himself largely to religious controversy and to introspective
philosophizing and meditation (his celebrated Pensées). Nietzsche mentions
Pascal dozens of times, and always with reference to this religious conversion
and its consequences: he is ‘the most instructive of all sacrifices to Christianity’.
(Ecce Homo II 3.)
PETRONIUS, Caius (suicide AD 65) Author of the Satyricon, a satire in prose and

verse on the social life of first century Rome.
PLATO (428–347 BC) ‘Plato against Homer: that is the whole, the genuine

antagonism’ (Genealogy of Morals III 25): the former as a slanderer of life, the
latter as its glorifier. Nietzsche’s attitude becomes comprehensible in the light of
his own ‘materialism’, for in that light Plato becomes a falsifier of reality.

Nietzsche considered Plato’s theory of suprasensible forms, his ethical
preoccupation and his other-worldly tendency in general as harmful to a healthy
appreciation of the present world and as specific errors springing from a false
relationship with the actual world: Plato is one of those who need to ‘lie
themselves out of reality’.
RENAN, Ernest (1823–92) French rationalist writer: the type of free-thinker who

has not really freed himself from religion.
ROUSSEAU, Jean-Jacques (1712–78) In his essay Schopenhauer as an Educator

(the third of the Untimely Meditations, 1874), Nietzsche offers a comparison
between Rousseau and Goethe, the former representing the revolutionary man
and the latter the contemplative, and in ‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’ 48 and
49 he contrasts them again. Goethe is now, of course, much more than the
contemplative man: he is, in fact, the superman, the embodiment of sublimated
will to power; and Rousseau too has undergone a change, this time for the worse:
from the revolutionary he has declined to the rabble, and is in fact the
representative of unsublimated will to power. Nietzsche’s long polemic against
Rousseau – there are dozens of references to him – can best be understood in the
light of this symbolism: Rousseau’s ‘back to nature’ means back to the animals,
back to passion uncontrolled.
SAINT-SIMON, Claude-Henri, Comte de (1760–1825) Inventor of an economic

theory involving common ownership of property and distribution of goods: the
Saint-Simonians acquired rather quickly some of the characteristics of religious
fanaticism.
SAINTE-BEUVE, Charles-Augustin (1804–69) Very influential literary critic and

historian. Nietzsche criticizes, here and elsewhere, his celebrated ‘objectivity’.
SALLUST (86–c.35 BC) Latin historian; chronicled the Catiline conspiracy. He

modelled his style on that of Thucydides.
SAND, George (Aurore Dupin, Baroness Dudevant, 1804–76) Novelist and writer.

‘It betrays corruption of the instincts – quite apart from the fact that it betrays bad
taste – when a woman appeals precisely to Madame Roland or Madame de Staël
or Monsieur George Sand as if something in favour of “woman as such” were
thereby demonstrated. Among men the above-named are the three comic women
as such – nothing more! – and precisely the best involuntary counter-arguments
against emancipation and female autocracy.’ (Beyond Good and Evil 233.)
SCHILLER, Friedrich (1759–1805) As a youth Nietzsche was a Schiller enthusiast;

he lost his enthusiasm as he grew older. From that he concluded that Schiller was
essentially something for young people (this opinion is expressed several times in

his works). Ultimately he considered Schiller superficial and Romantic.
SCHOPENHAUER, Arthur (1788–1860) His World as Will and Idea (1818) was a

major influence on the young Nietzsche, who for many years considered himself
a ‘Schopenhaueran’: but Schopenhauer’s pessimism, his duality of will and
intellect, his metaphysical preoccupation and his hostility towards the emotions,
particularly sexuality, were none of them finally acceptable and Nietzsche’s
mature philosophy is not indebted to Schopenhauer in any way. His youthful
discipleship is, however, the reason for the frequency with which the older
Nietzsche makes polemical points against Schopenhauer.
SOCRATES (470–399 BC) ‘Socrates… stands so close to me that I am almost

always fighting with him’, Nietzsche confessed in the notes for an uncompleted
essay of 1875 (Wissenschaft und Weisheit in Kampf) and the fight went on until
the end. Socrates is the type of ‘the philosopher’ and in investigating the mind
and heart of Socrates Nietzsche is investigating his own: with none of the figures
he discusses is the tremendous inner dialectic of Nietzsche’s lifelong monologue
so clearly displayed as it is in the passages dealing with Socrates (of which there
are hundreds). The ‘problem’ of Socrates is the problem of reason, of the status
of reason in the life of man: and Nietzsche finds that problem inexhaustible.
SPENCER, Herbert (1820–1903) Philosopher of evolution. Nietzsche never refers to

him without disdain.
SPINOZA, Baruch (1632–77) On five main points, Nietzsche says in a letter of 30

July 1881, he finds that he and Spinoza are in agreement: on denying free will,
purpose, the moral world-order, the unegoistic and the existence of evil. But he
deprecates ‘that hocus-pocus of mathematical form with which Spinoza encased
his philosophy as if in brass’. (Beyond Good and Evil 5.)
STENDHAL (Henri Beyle, 1783–1842) Greatly admired by Nietzsche for his

psychological insight and as an ‘honest atheist… Perhaps I am even envious of
Stendhal? He has robbed me of the best atheist joke, which precisely I could have
made: “God’s only excuse is that he does not exist.”’ (Ecce Homo II 3.)
STRAUSS, David (1808–74) His Life of Jesus and The Old Faith and the New were

very popular expositions of the rationalist approach to religion. The first of
Nietzsche’s Untimely Meditations – David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer
(1873) – was a violent attack on him.
THUCYDIDES (c. 460–c. 395 BC) Greek historian, author of the History of the

Peloponnesian War.
TOLSTOY, Leo (1828–1910) Décadent because of his emphasis on ‘pity’.

(Genealogy of Morals III 26, Will to Power 1020.) That ‘resist not evil’ is the key
to the Gospel may have been suggested to Nietzsche by Tolstoy (see Tolstoy’s
My Religion, chapter I), but the conclusions he draws from this have nothing to
do with Tolstoy.
WAGNER, Richard (1813–83) As a youth Nietzsche was deeply under Wagner’s

influence; around 1876 he broke away, but the figure of Wagner continued to
haunt him and there is an unceasing dialogue between the two in Nietzsche’s
works almost passim. In the mature Nietzsche, Wagner is the type of ‘the artist’.
He plays a relatively minor role in Twilight because an entire book The Wagner
Case, had just been devoted to him; but later in the year 1888 he comes to the
forefront again in Nietzsche contra Wagner.
WINCKELMANN, Johann Joachim (1717–68) Archaeologist and historian of art

whose conception of ancient Greece became the accepted one for the German
world throughout the eighteenth century. Goethe’s view of the ancient world
derived from Winckelmann, whose writings he studied and whom he celebrated
in Winckelmann and his Century (1805).
ZOLA, Emile (1840–1902) ‘There is no such thing as pessimistic art…. Art affirms,

Job affirms. – But Zola? But the Goncourts? – The things they exhibit are ugly:
but that they exhibit them comes from pleasure in this ugliness….’ (Will to
Power 821.)

CHRONOLOGY
15 October. Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche born in the parsonage at
Röcken, near Lützen, Germany, the first of three children of Karl
1844
Ludwig, the village pastor, and Fraziska Nietzsche, daughter of the
pastor of a nearby village.
1849 27 July. Nietzsche’s father dies.
1850

The Nietzsche family moves to Naumberg, in Thuringia, in April.
Arthur Schopenhauer publishes Essays, Aphorisms and Maxims.

1856 Birth of Freud.
1858

The family moves to No. 18 Weingarten. Nietzsche wins a place at
the prestigious Pforta grammar school.

Forms a literary society, ‘Germania’, with two Naumberg friends.
1860 Jacob Burckhardt publishes The Civilization of the Renaissance in
Italy.
1864 Enters Bonn University as a student of theology and philology.
At Easter, Nietzsche abandons the study of theology having lost his
1865 Christian belief. Leaves Bonn for Leipzig, following his former tutor
of philology, Friedrich Ritschl. Begins to read Schopenhauer.
First publication, ‘Zur Geschichte der Theognideischen
1867 Spruchsammlung’ (The History of the Theognidia Collection) in the
Rheinische Museum für Philiogie. Begins military service.
1868 Discharged from the army. Meets Richard Wagner.
Appointed to the chair of classical philology at Basle University

1869 having been recommended by Ritschl. Awarded a doctorate by
Leipzig. Regular visitor at Wagners’ home in Tribschen.
Delivers public lectures on ‘The Greek Music Drama’ and ‘Socrates
1870 and Tragedy’. Serves as a medical orderly with the Prussian army
where he is taken ill with diphtheria.
Applies unsuccessfully for the chair of philology at Basle. His health
1871 deteriorates. Takes leave to recover and works on The Birth of
Tragedy.
1872

The Birth of Tragedy published (January). Public lectures ‘On the
Future of our Educational Institutions’.

1873 Untimely Meditations I: David Strauss published.
1874

Untimely Meditations II: On the Use and Disadvantage of History
for Life and III: Schopenhauer as Educator published.

1875

Meets Peter Gast, who is to become his earliest ‘disciple’. Suffers
from ill-health leading to a general collapse at Christmas.

Granted a long absence from Basle due to continuing ill-health.
Proposes marriage to Mathilde Trampedach but is rejected. Untimely
1876
Meditations IV: Richard Wagner in Bayreuth published. Travels to
Italy.

1878

Human, All Too Human published. His friendship with the Wagners
comes to an end.

1879

Assorted Opinions and Maxims published. Retires on a pension from
Basle due to sickness.

1880

The Wanderer and his Shadow and Human, All Too Human II
published.

1881 Dawn published.
1882

The Gay Science published. Proposes to Lou Andreas Salomé and is
rejected.

1883

13 February. Wagner dies in Venice. Thus Spoke Zarathustra I and II
published.

1884 Thus Spoke Zarathustra III published.
1885 Zarathustra IV privately printed.
1886 Beyond Good and Evil published.
1887 On the Genealogy of Morals published.
The Wagner Case published. First review of his work as a whole
1888 published in the Bern Bund. Experiences some improvement in
health but this is short-lived.
Suffers mental collapse in Turin and is admitted to a psychiatric
1889 clinic at the University of Jena. Twilight of the Idols published and
Nietzsche contra Wagner privately printed.
1890 Nietzsche returns to his mother’s home.
1891 Dithyrambs of Dionysus published.
1894

The Anti-Christ published. The ‘Nietzsche Archive’ founded by his
sister, Elisabeth.

1895 Nietzsche contra Wagner published.
1897

20 April. Nietzsche’s mother dies; and Elisabeth moves Nietzsche to

Weimar.
1900 25 August. Nietzsche dies. Freud publishes Interpretation of Dreams.
1901

Publication of The Will to Power, papers selected by Elisabeth and
Peter Gast.

1908 Ecce Homo published.

* jeder ‘Fall’ ein GlÜcksfall. ‘Fall’ means case, ‘Glücksfall’ a piece of good luck. As well as
being a play on words there seems to be a reference intended to Der Fall Wagner (The Wagner
Case), Nietzsche’s witty attack on Wagner completed immediately before Twilight was begun
and which was also announced, ironically of course, as a ‘relief’ from a sterner task.
† The spirit grows, strength is restored by wounding.

* Like The Wagner Case, presumably.
† See the Translator’s Note, page 26.

* Suche Nullen! ‘Nullen’ means nobodies, ciphers, as well as noughts – ‘Seek nobodies!’ The
aphorism is a pun: ‘if you want to multiply yourself by 100 [have followers] get noughts
[nobodies] behind you!’
† Zeitgemässe. Nietzsche’s conception of himself as Unzeitgemäss (untimely, inopportune,
independent of the age) is reflected in the chapter tide ‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’
(Streifzüge eines Unzeitgemässen), which itself refers back to Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen
(Untimely Meditations), the collective title of four essays published 1873 – 6 and intended for
others left incomplete.
‡ bread and Circe, in place of panem et circenses = bread and circuses.

* Refers to a popular adage deriving from Johann Gottfried Seume’s poem Die Gesänge.
† Geist. All the meanings contained in this word cannot be conveyed in a single English word:
what is meant is spirit, mind, intellect, intelligence. I have translated it as ‘spirit’, ‘spiritual’ when
the most inclusive sense seems indicated, as ‘intellect’, ‘intellectual’ when this seems more
appropriate.
‡ i.e. since the establishment of the Reich.
§ contradiction in terms.
|| Gewissensbisse (conscience-bites) is the ordinary term for pangs of conscience.

* Der getretene Wurm krümmt sich plays upon the German equivalent of ‘Even a worm will
turn’.
† Refers to the traditional misreading of a line in Ernst Moritz Arndt’s patriotic song Des
deutscben Vaterland: ‘So with die deutsche Zunge klingt, Und Gott in Himmel Lieder singt’.
‘Gott’ is dative: Wherever the German tongue resounds And sings songs to God in Heaven - but
is humorously understood as nominative: And God in Heaven sings songs.
‡ One can think and write only when sitting down.
§ das Sitzfleisch: etymologically ‘the posterior’ (sitting-flesh). ‘Assiduity’, from sedere = to sit, is
cognate. Hence the contrast with ‘walking’ ideas.

* According to Plato (Phaedo), Socrates’ last words were: ‘Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will
you remember to pay the debt?’ One gave a cock to Asclepius on recovering from an illness:
Socrates seems to be saying that life is, or his life has been an illness.
† Specifically the followers of Schopenhauer, among whom Nietzsche himself was numbered in
his young days.
‡ Unanimity of the wise.

* Nietzsche’s first published book.
† a monster in face, a monster in soul.

* from the viewpoint of eternity.

* The school of Parmenides of Elea (fifth century BC), who denied the logical possibility of
change and motion and argued that the only logical possibility was unchanging being.

* the cause of itself.
† the most real being.

* The context makes it clear that this Kantian-sounding term is not being employed in the sense
of Kant’s twelve a priori ‘categories’, but simply to mean the faculty of reasoning.

* the truth = Wahrheit, corresponding to wahre Welt = real world.
† i.e. Kantian, from the northerly German city in which Kant was born and in which he lived and
died.
‡ Here meaning empiricism, philosophy founded on observation and experiment.

* Zarathustra begins.

* The passions must be killed.

* The abbey at Soligny from which the Trappist order – characterized by the severity of its
discipline – takes its name.

* Behold the man!

* In Kant’s philosophy the causes of sensations are called ‘things in themselves’. The thing in
itself is unknowable: the sensations we actually experience are produced by the operation of our
subjective mental apparatus.
† ugly shameful part.

* first cause.

* Nietzsche introduced this term in Towards a Genealogy of Morals I 11: it means man
considered as an animal, and the first use of the term is immediately followed by a reference to
‘the Roman, Arab, Teutonic, Japanese nobility, the Homeric heroes, the Scandinavian Vikings’
and to the Athenians of the age of Pericles as examples of men ‘the animal’ in whom ‘has to get
out again, has to go back to the wilderness.’

* The ‘untouchables’ excluded from the caste system.

* This is one of the major themes of The Anti-Christ.
† pious fraud.

* beer.

* A philosophical term meaning an explanation of something adequate to explaining it fully.
Schopenhauer’s doctoral thesis was On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason,
and Nietzsche sometimes (as here) uses the term in a humorously inappropriate context.

* beauty is for the few.

* in natural dirtiness.
† Der Trompeter von Säckingen (1853) by Joseph Viktor von Scheffel once enjoyed huge
popularity in Germany; Viktor Nessler’s opera based on it (1844) was also a popular success.
‡ oder die Schule der Geläufigkeit – nach Weibern. The joke is untranslatable: or the school of
Geläufigkeit – after women. ‘Geläufigkeit’ means facility, skill (referring to Lizst’s virtuosity as a
pianist), but its root is ‘laufen’ = to run; and ‘läufisch’ means, among other things, lecherous.
§ milk in abundance.

* scandal.
† The headquarters in Paris of Jansenism, the doctrine that the human will is constitutionally
incapable of goodness, and that salvation is therefore by free and undeserved grace. Sainte-Beuve
wrote a celebrated history (1840–59) of the intellectual movement which grew up around PortRoyal.

* The Imitation of Christ, a famous work attributed to the German mystic Thomas à Kempis
(1379–1471).
† das Ewig-Weibliche, Goethe’s coinage in the last lines of Faust (‘The eternal-feminine draws us
aloft’), is often the object of Nietzsche’s mockery, apparently because he cannot see any meaning
in it.

* petty facts.

* In The Birth of Tragedy.

* I am my own successor.
†… that worthy gentleman who, returning from an amorous rendezvous as if things had gone
well, said gratefully: ‘Though the power be lacking, the lust is praiseworthy.’ ‘Voluptas’ replaces
the usual ‘voluntas’ = will.

* Refers to the last lines of Luther’s hymn ‘Ein’ feste Burg’– where, however, what is to be let
depart is the things of this world and the Reich means the kingdom of Heaven.

* Schön and hässlich is the German translation of Macbeth’s witches’ ‘fair and foul’.
† Fragmentary sketches by Nietzsche published after his death, i.e. long after this reference to
them.

* intellectual love of God.
† Art for art’s sake.

* The opening line of Tamino’s aria in Mozart’s The Magic Flute.
† children or books.
‡ I shall look at myself, I shall read myself, I shall delight myself and I shall say: Can I really have
had so much wit?

* ochsen: to work hard, slave – also to cram, study hard.
† In Goethe’s Faust, Part I, Scene 3.
‡ The seat of the Wagner Festival.
§ Parsifal, eponymous hero of Wagner’s last opera, is described as a pure, i.e. chaste, fool (reine
Tor) whose naïvety is proof against temptation of every kind. Nietzsche considered the plot of
Parsifal preposterous and persistently uses the phrase ‘reine Torheit’ (pure folly) in the sense of
complete folly.

* shameful part.

* pure, raw.

* Sehr verbunden! – a play on the name of the ‘Bund’.

* Alludes to Max von Schenkendorf’s poem ‘Freiheit, die ich meine’ (Freedom as I mean it).

* Quotation from the closing scene of Faust, Part Two.
† It is unworthy of great spirits to spread abroad the agitation they feel.

* in respect of tactics.

* Refers to Goethe’s Venetian Epigrams, in which the Cross is one of four things Goethe says he
cannot endure.
† i.e. the Revaluation of all Values.

* more enduring than brass.

* Menippus (third century BC), of the Cynic school of philosophy, produced a number of satires
no longer extant.

* From the title of Book VII of Goethe’s novel Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship: ‘Confessions
of a Beautiful Soul’.
† German foolishness.

* For Nietzsche’s theory that all events recur eternally and its emotional significance in providing
the most extreme formula of life-affirmation, see Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Part III (‘Of the Vision
and the Riddle’, ‘The Convalescent’ and ‘The Seven Seals’) and Part IV (‘The Intoxicated
Song’).

*From Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Part III, ‘Of Old and New Law-Tables’, with minor variants.

* In Greek mythology a race dwelling beyond the north wind (Boreas) in a country of warmth
and plenty.

* original sin.
† A famous theological college in Swabia.

* ‘Act as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will a general natural law’ is
one of the definitions of the ‘categorical imperative’ in Kant’s Metaphysic of Morals.

* The highest or priestly caste in the Hindu system,
† ‘Charity’ is in the Lutheran Bible rendered by the word ‘love’ (‘Liebe’).

* condition.

* characteristic.

* ‘That is as fitting as a fist in the eye’ is a German idiom meaning a complete unlikeness
between two things – ‘alike as chalk and cheese’.
† Amphitryon’s wife Alcmene refused to sleep with him until he had revenged the death of her
brothers; while Amphitryon was away engaged on this task his still virgin bride was seduced by
Zeus and subsequently gave birth to Heracles.

* Matthew vi, 28–30.

* God, as Paul created him, is a denial of God.
† ‘The Law’ in Paul’s usage of the word.

* From a famous line in Schiller’s Maid of Orleans:‘Against stupidity the gods themselves fight
in vain.’

* To the greater honour of God.

* undecisiveness.

* ‘Fingerfertigkeit’ plays upon ‘finger of God’.

* Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Part III, ‘Of the Priests’.

* I Corinthians vii, 2 and 9.

* A phrase from Goethe’s Elective Affinities.

* ‘The eternal Jew’ is also the German form of the Wandering Jew.

* In German, Nihilist und Christ do rhyme.

* unlucky day.

