David Strauss,
the Confessor and the Writer
Public opinion in Germany seems almost to forbid discussion of the
evil and perilous consequences of a war, and especially of one that
has ended victoriously: there is thus all the more ready an ear for
those writers who know no weightier authority than this public
opinion and who therefore vie with one another in lauding a war and
in seeking out the mighty influence it has exerted on morality, cul­
ture and art. This notwithstanding, it has to be said that a great vic­
tory is a great danger. Human nature finds it harder to endure a
victory than a defeat; indeed, it seems to be easier to achieve a victory
than to endure it in such a way that it does not in fact turn into a
defeat. Of all the evil consequences, however, which have followed
the recent war with France* perhaps the worst is a widespread,
indeed universal, error: the error, committed by public opinion and
by all who express their opinions publicly, that German culture too
was victorious in that struggle and must therefore now be loaded
with garlands appropriate to such an extraordinary achievement.
This delusion is in the highest degree destructive: not because it is a
delusion - for there exist very salutary and productive errors
but
because it is capable of turning our victory into a defeat: into the defeat,
if not the extirpation, of the German spirit for the benefit of the (German
Reich'.
Even supposing that a war of this kind were in fact a war between
two cultures, the value of the victor would still be a very relative one
and could certainly not justify choruses of victory or acts of self­
glorification. For one would have to know what the defeated culture
had been worth: perhaps it was worth very little: in which case the
victory of the victorious culture, even if attended by the most
magnificent success in arms, would constitute no invitation to
ecstatic triumphs. On the other hand, in the present case there can
be no question of a victory of German culture, for the simple reason
that French culture continues to exist as heretofore, and we are
dependent upon it as heretofore. Our culture played no part even in
our success in arms. Stern discipline, natural bravery and en­
durance, superior generalship, unity and obedience in the ranks, in
*The 'recem war wilh France' is [he Franco-Prussian War of 1 8 70- 1 .  (This and all sub­
sequelH notes arc by rhe translaror.)
:1 1
short, elements that have nothing to do with culture, procured for us
the victory over opponents in whom the most important of these ele­
ments were lacking: the wonder is that that which at present calls
itself'culture' in Germany proved so small an obstacle to the military
demands which had to be met for the achievement of a great success
- perhaps it was only because that which calls itself culture foresaw a
greater advantage in subordinating itself this time. But if it is now
allowed to grow and luxuriate, if it is pampered with the flattering
delusion that the victory belonged to it, then it will, as I have said,
have the power to extirpate the German spirit - and who knows
whether the German body remaining will be of any use whatever!
If it were possible to take that calm and tenacious bravery which
the German demonstrated against the emotional and shordived
impetuosity of the French and turn it against the enemy within,
against that highly ambiguous and in any case alien 'cultivatedness'
which is nowadays dangerously misunderstood to constitute cul­
ture, then all hope for the creation of a genuine German culture, the
antithesis of this cultivatedness, would nCjt be lost: for the Germans
have never lacked clear-sighted and courageous leaders and
generals - though these have frequendy lacked Germans. But
whether it is in fact possible to redirect German bravery in this way
seems to me more and more doubtful and, after the late war, daily
more improbable; for I see how everyone is convinced that struggle
and bravery are no longer required, but that, on the contrary, most
things are regulated in the finest possible way and that in any case
everything that needed doing has long since been done - in short,
. that the finest seeds of culture have everywhere been sown and are in
places bursting into leaf and even into luxuriant blossom. In this
realm it is not mere complacency, but joy and jubilation which
reign. I sense this joy and jubilation in the incomparable self­
assurance of our German journalists and manufacturers of novels,
tragedies, songs and histories: for these types patendy belong
together in a single guild which seems to have entered into a con­
spiracy to take charge of the leisure and ruminative hours of modern
man - that is to say, his 'cultural moments' - and in these to stun him
with printed paper. Since the war, all is happiness, dignity and self­
awareness in this guild: after such 'successes of German culture' it
feels itself not merely confirmed and sanctioned, but almost sac­
rosanct; and it therefore speaks more solemnly, takes pleasure in
addressing itself to the German people, publishes collected editions
in the manner of the classics, and goes so far as to employ those
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
international journals which stand at its service to proclaim certain
individuals from its midst as the new German classics and model
writers. One might perhaps have expected that the more thoughtful
and learned among cultivated Germans would have recognized the
dangers inherent in such a misuse of success, or at least have felt this
spectacle as painful: for what could be more painful than the sight of
a deformed man pluming himself before the mirror like a cockerel
and exchanging admiring glances with his reflection? But the
learned classes are happy to let happen what is happening, and have
in any case quite enough to do in maintaining themselves without
the additional burden of looking after the welfare of the German
spirit. Its members are, moreover, supremely convinced that their
own culture is the ripest and fairest fruit of the age, indeed of all the
ages, and cannot comprehend why anyone should need to look after
the welfare of German culture in general, since they themselves and
countless numbers like them have already gone far, far beyond all
such considerations. The more cautious observer, however, especially
if he is a foreigner, cannot help noticing that what the German
scholar now calls his culture and that jubilant culture of the new
German classics differ from one another only in the extent of their
knowledge: wherever the question is one not of knowledge and
information, but of art and ability - wherever, that is to say, life bears
witness to the culture - there is now only one German culture: and is
it this that is supposed to have triumphed over France?
Such an assertion seems completely incomprehensible: all im­
partial judges, and finally the French themselves, have seen
Germany's decisive advantage to have lain in the more extensive
knowledge possessed by its officers, in the superior training of its
troops, and in the greater science of its conduct of the war. In what
sense, then, can German culture be said to have triumphed, if one
thinks to deduct from it German erudition? In no sense: for the
moral qualities of stricter discipline and readier obedience have
nothing to do with culture - though they distinguished the Mace­
donian soldiery from the Greek, for example, the latter were incom­
parably more cultured. It can only be the result of confusion if one
speaks of the victory of German culture, a confusion originating in
the fact that in Germany there no longer exists any clear conception
of what culture is.
Culture is, above all, unity of artistic style in all the expressions
of the life of a p eople. Much knowledge and learning is neither
an essential means to culture nor a sign of it, and if needs be can
get along very well with the opposite of culture, barbarism, which
is lack of style or a chaotic jumble of all styles.
It is in such a chaotic jumble of styles that the German of our day
dwells: and one seriously wonders how, with all his erudition, he can
possibly fail to notice it, but, on the contrary, rejoices from the very
heart at the 'culture' he at present possesses. For everything ought to
instruct him: every glance he casts at his clothes, his room, his home,
every walk he takes through the streets of his town, every visit he pays
to a fashionable shop; in his social life he ought to be aware of the
origin of his manners and deportment, in the world of our artistic
institutions, of our concerts, theatres and museums, he ought to
notice the grotesque juxtaposition and confusion of different styles.
The German amasses around him the forms and colours, pro­
ductions and curiosities of every age and every clime, and produces
that modem fairground motley which his learned colleagues are
then obliged to observe and classify as the 'modern as such', while he
himself remains seated calmly in the midst of the tumult. But with
this kind of' culture' , which is in fact only a phlegmatic lack of all feel­
ing for culture, one cannot overcome enemies, least of all those who,
like the French, actually possess a real and productive culture,
regardless of what its value may be, and from whom we have
hitherto copied everything, though usually with little skill.
If we had in fact ceased to copy it we would not thereby have
triumphed over it, but only have liberated ourselves from it: only if
we had imposed upon the French an original German culture could
there be any question of a victory of German culture. In the mean­
time, we should not forget that we are still dependent on Paris in all
matters of form, just as before
and that we have to go on being
dependent, for up to now there has been no original German
culture.
We all ought to have been aware of this from our own knowledge:
in addition to which, one of the few who had a right to speak to the
Germans of it in a tone of reproach has publicly revealed it. 'We
Germans are of yesterday', Goethe once said to Eckermann; 'it is
true that we have been soundly cultivating ourselves for a century,
but another couple of centuries may have to pass before sufficient
spirit and higher culture has penetrated our countrymen and
become general for it to be possible to say of them: it is a long time
since they were barbarians.' *
*Goethe to Eckermann, on 3 May 1 827.
David Strauss) the confessor and the writer
If, however, our public and private life so manifesdy does not bear
the stamp of a productive and stylistically secure culture, if our great
artists, moreover, have admitted and continue to admit this dreadful
and, for a gifted people, profoundly humiliating fact, how is it poss­
ible that the greatest self-satisfaction nonetheless continues to reign
among educated Germans: a self-satisfaction which since the recent
war has shown itself ready to burst out in cries of jubilation and
triumph? In any event, there exists a steadfast belief that we are in
possession of a genuine culture: the enormous incongruity between
this complacent, indeed exultant belief and an in fact notorious
cultural deficiency seems to be apparent only to the select few. For
all those whose views coincide with public opinion have covered
their eyes and stopped their ears
the incongruity must not be
admitted to exist. How is this possible? What force is so powerful as
to dictate such a 'must not' ? What species of man must have come to
dominate in Germany that such strong and simple feelings can be
prohibited and expression of them obstructed? I shall call this
power, this species of man, by its name - it is the · cultural
philistine.
The word 'philistine', as is well known, belongs to the student
vocabulary, and signifies, in its wider, popular sense, the antithesis
of a son of the muses, of the artist, of the man of genuine culture. The
cultural philistine, however - the study of whom, and the hearing of
whose confessions when he makes them, has now become a dis­
agreeable duty
distinguishes himself from the general idea of the
species 'philistine' through a superstition: he fancies that he is him­
self a son of the muses and man of culture; an incomprehensible
delusion which reveals that he does not even know what a philistine,
and the antithesis of a philistine, is: so we shall not be surprised to
find that usually he solemnly denies he is a philistine. With this lack
of all self-knowledge, he feels firmly convinced that his 'culture' is
the complete expression of true German culture: , and since he
everywhere discovers cultivated people of his own kind, and finds all
public institutions, schools and cultural and artistic bodies organized
in accordance with his kind of cultivation and in the service of his
requirements, he also bears with him everywhere the triumphant
feeling of being the worthy representative of contemporary German
culture and frames his demands and pretcn'Jions accordingly. If,
however, true culture must in any event presuppose unity of style,
and even an inferior and degenerate culture cannot bó thought of as
failing to exhibit a stylistic unity within which the manifold
phenomena which characterize it are harmonized, this confusion
reigning in the deluded mind of the cultural philistine may well
orginate in i:he fact that, discovering everywhere identical repro­
ductions of himself, he infers from this identity of all 'cultivated'
people the existence of a unity of style and thus the existence of a
German culture. He perceives around him nothing but needs ident­
ical with and views similar to his own; wherever he goes he is at once
embraced by a bond of tacit conventions in regard to many things,
especially in the realms of religion and art: this impressive
homogeneity, this tutti unisono* which no one commands but which
is always ready to break forth, seduces him to the belief that a culture
here holds sway. But systematic and oppressive philistinism does
not constitute a culture, even an inferior culture, merely because it
possesses system: it must always be the antithesis of a culture,
namely a permanendy estahlished barbarity. For that uniformity
which is so striking in the cultivated pe0ple of Germany today is a
unity only through the conscious or unconscious exclusion and
negation of every artistically productive form and the demand of a
true style. An unhappy contortion must have taken place in the brain
of the cultural philistine: he regards as culture precisely that which
negates culture, and since he is accustomed to proceed with con­
sistency he finally acquires a coherent collection of such negations, a
system of un-culture, to which one might even concede a certain
'unity of style' if it made any sense to speak of a barbarism with style.
Ifhe is allowed to choose between a stylistically agreeable action and
one of the opposite kind, he invariably elects the latter, and because
he always does so all his actions bear the same negative stamp. It is
precisely this negative stamp which enables him to recognize the
nature of the 'German culture' he has patented: whatever does not
correspond to it he adjudges hostile and inimical to him. In this case
the cultural philistine does no more than defend himself: he denies,
secretes, stops his ears, averts his eyes, he is a negative being even in
his hatred and hostility. The person he hates most of all, however, is
him who treats him as a philistine and tells him what he is: a hin­
drance to the strong and creative, a labyrinth for ali who doubt and
go astray, a swamp to the feet of the weary, a fetter to all who would
pursue lofty goals, a poisonous mist to new buds, a parching desert
"tutti unisono: everybody, together
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
to the German spirit seeking and thirsting for new life. For it seeks,
this German spirit! and you hate it because it seeks and refuses to
believe you when you say you have already found what it is seeking.
How is it possible that a type such as the cultural philistine could
have come into existence and, once extant, could a(;quire · the
authority of supreme arbiter over all the problems of German cul­
ture; how is this possible, after there has filed past us a whole line of
great heroic figures whose every movement, every feature, whose
questioning voice, whose burning eye, betrayed but one thing: that
they were seekers, and that what they were seeking with such per­
severence was precisely that which the cultural philistine fancied he
already possessed: a genuine, original German culture. Is there a
ground, they seemed to ask, so pure, so untouched, of such virginal
holiness, that the German spirit may raise its house upon this
ground and upon no other? Questioning thus, they made their way
through the wilderness and thorns of wretched and meagre ages,
and as seekers they passed from our sight: so that one of them,
speaking for all, could say in his old age; 'I have toiled for half a cen­
tury and allowed myself no rest, but have continually striven and
sought and worked as well and as hard as I could.'*
But what view does our philistine culture take of these seekers? It
assumes them to be finders, not seekers, and seems to forget that it
was as seekers that they regarded themselves. 'We have our culture,
do we not?' they say, 'for we have our classics, do we not? Not only
have the foundations been laid, but the building itself stands already
upon them -we ourselves are this building.' And the philistine raises
his hand to his own brow.
Thus to misjudge our classics, however, and in thinking to honour
them thus to damn them, it is necessary not to know them: and this is
indeed the universal fact. For ctherwise it would be known that there
is only one way of honouring them, and that is to go on seeking in
their spirit and with their courage, and not to grow weary of doing
so. On the other hand, to affix to them the suspect word 'classic' and
from time to time to 'edify' oneself with their works is to resign one­
self to those feeble and egoistic sensations promised by our concert
halls and theatres to anyone who can pay for them; the same applies
to the erection of statues of them and the naming of festivals and
societies after them - all these things are merely cash payments by
means of which the cultural philistine settles accounts with them so
"'Goethe to Eckennann, 14 March 1 830.
as not to have to follow after them and to go on seeking. For 'All seek­
ing is at an end' is the motto of the philistines.
There was a time when this motto was to some extent sensible: the
time when, during the first decade of the present century, so much
confused seeking, experimenting, wrecking, promising, surmising,
hoping was going on in Germany that the spiritual middle class was
right to fear for its own safety. At that time it was right to reject with a
shrug of the shoulders the brew of fantastic and language-twisting
philosophies and tendentious historiographies, a carnival of all the
gods and myths, which the Romantics had mixed together, and to
reject too the current poetic fashions and follies dreamed up in a
state of intoxication - right, that is, because the philistine does not
have the right even to a debauch. With the craftiness pertaining to
baser natures, however, he took the opportunity thus afforded to
cast suspicion on seeking as such and to promote a comfortable con­
sciousness of having already found. H is eyes were opened to the joys
of philistinism: he saved himself from all the wild experimentation
going on by a flight into the idyllic, and to the resdessly creative drive
of the artist he opposed a certain easy complacency, a self­
contentment in one's own limitations, one's own placidity, even in
one's own narrow-mindedness. His attenuated finger pointed,
without any false modesty, to the hidden and secret corners of his
life, to the many moving and naive pleasures which sprang up like
blushing flowers in the most wretched depths of the uncultivated
existence and as it were mire of the philistine world.
There were a number of representational talents who, with a
gende brush, depicted the happiness, the cosiness, the prosaicness,
the bucolic health, the ease and contentment to be found in the nur­
sery, the scholar's study and the farmhouse. With such picture­
books of reality in their hands, these self-satisfied people then
sought to come to terms once and for all with the classics they found
so unsetding and with the demand for further seeking which pro­
ceeded from them; they devised the concept of the epigone-age with
the object of obtaining peace and quiet and so as to meet every
uncomfortable innovation with the condemnatory verdict 'epigone­
work'. It was these same self-contented people who, with the same
end in view of guaranteeing their own peace, took charge of history
and sought to transform every science which might be expected to
disturb their complacency into an historical discipline, especially so
in the case of philosophy and classical philology. Through historical
awareness they saved themselves from enthusiasm
for history was
1 0
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
no longer supposed to engender enthusiasm, even though Goethe
might think it did: stupefaction is now the goal of these unphilo­
sophical admirers of nil admirari* when they seek to understand
everything historically. While professing to hate fanaticism and
intolerance in any form, what they really hated was the donlinating
genius and the tyranny of the real demands of culture; and that is
why they employed all their powers in paralyzing, stupefying or dis­
rupting all those quarters where fresh and powerful movements
might be expected to appear. A philosophy which chastely con­
cealed behind arabesque flourishes the philistine confession of its
author invented in addition a formula for the apotheosis of the com­
monplace: it spoke of the rationality of the real, and thus ingratiated
itself with the cultural philistine, who also loves arabesque flourishes
but above all conceives himself alone to be real and treats his reality
as the standard of reason in the world. He now permitted everyone,
himself included, to reflect, to research, to aestheticize, above all to
compose poetry and music, to paint pictures, even to create entire
philosophies: the sole proviso was that everything must remain as it
was before, that nothing should at any price undermine the
'rational' and the 'rôal', that is to say, the philistine. The latter, to be
sure, is very partial to abandoning himself from time to time to the
pleasant and daring extravagances of art and sceptical his­
toriography and knows how to appreciate the charm of such forms
of entertainment and distraction; but he sternly segregates the
'serious things of life' - that is to say profession, business, wife and
child - from its pleasures: and to the latter belongs more or less
everything that has anything to do with culture. Therefore woe to an
art that starts to take itself seriously and makes demands that touch
upon his livelihood, his business and his habits, in short, his philis­
tine 'serious things of life'
he averts his eyes from such an art as
though from something indecent, and with the air of a duenna he
warns every defenceless virtue not to look.
Being so fond of dissuading, he is grateful to the artist who pays
heed to him and lets himself be dissuaded; he gives him to under­
stand that henceforth no sublime masterpieces are to be demanded
of him, but only two much easier things: either imitation of actuality
to the point of mimicry in idylls or gently humorous satires, or free
copies of the most familiar and famous of the classics, though incor­
porating timid concessions to the taste of the time. For when he
"'nil admirari: to wonder at nothing
1 1
values only the imitations of an epigone or the icon-like portraiture
of the present, he knows that the latter will glorify him and augment
general contentment with 'actuality', while the former, as well as
being quite harmless, will even enhance his reputation as a judge of
classical taste - for he has, as aforesaid, come to terms once and for
all with the classics themselves. Finally, he invents for his habits,
modes of thinking, likes and dislikes, the general formula 'healthi­
ness', and dismisses every uncomfortable disturber of the peace as
being sick and neurotic. Thus David Strauss, a true satisfait with the
state of our culture and a typical philistine, once spoke character­
istically of 'Arthur Schopenhauer's ingenious but in many ways
unhealthy and unprofitable philosophizing'. For it is a cruel fact that
'the spirit' is accustomed most often to descend upon the 'unhealthy
and unprofitable', and on those occasions when he is honest with
himself even the philistine is aware that the philosophies his kind
produce and bring to market are in many ways spiritless, though
they are of course extremely healthy and profitable.
For now and then the philistines, whel) they are alone by them­
selves, take wine together and recall, in honest, naive and loquacious
fashion, the great deeds of the war; on these occasions many things
come to light that are otherwise anxiously concealed, and some­
times one of them even lets out the fundamental secrets of the entire
brotherhood. Such a thing occurred very recently in the case of a
celebrated aesthetician of the Hegelian school of reasoning. The
provocation was, to be sure, sufficiently unusual: a circle of philis­
tines was celebrating the memory of a true and genuine non­
philistine, and one moreover who in the strictest sense of the word
perished by the philistines: the memory of the glorious HOlderlin;
and the well-known aesthetician thus had a right on this occasion to
speak of tragic souls which perish through contact with 'reality' - the
word reality here understood in the sense, already alluded to, of
philistine rationality. But 'reality' is now something different from
what it was in Holderlin's day, and it may well be asked whether he
would have been able to find his way in the present great age. 'I do
not know', said Friedrich Vischer, 'whether his gentle soul could
have endured all the harshness involved in any war or all the rotten­
ness we have seen advancing since the war in every sphere of life.
Perhaps he would again have sunk back into despair. He was one of
the unarmed souls, he was the Werther of Greece, a lover without
hope; his was a life full of gentleness and desire, but there was also
strength and substance in his will, and greatness, richness and life in
1 2
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
his style, which now and then reminds us of Aeschylus. Only his
spirit had too little of hardness in it; he lacked the weapon of
humour; he could not admit that one can be a philistine without being a bar­
barian.' It is this last confession, and not the sugary condolences of
the after-dinner speaker, that concerns us. Yes, one admits to being a
philistine - but a barbarian! Not at any price. Poor H6lderlin was,
alas, incapable of drawing such fine distinctions. If, to be sure, one
understands by the word barbarian the opposite of civilization, or
even equates it with such things as piracy and cannibalism, then the
distinction is justified; but what the aesthetician is plainly trying to
say is that one can be a philistine and at the same time a man of cul­
ture - this is the joke that poor H6lderlin had not the humour to see
and the lack of which destroyed him.
On this occasion a second admission escaped the speaker: 'It is
not always strength of will, but weaknÂss, which enables us to tran­
scend that longing for the beautiful experienced so profoundly 'by
tragic souls' -that, or something like it, was the confession, deposed
in the name of the assembled 'we', that is to say the 'transcenders',
the 'transcenders through weakness'! Let us be content with these
admissions! For we now know two things, and from the mouth of an
initiate: first, that this 'we' has really got free of the desire for beauty,
has indeed actually transcended it; and, secondly, that this was
accomplished through weakness! In less indiscrete moments this
weakness had been called by a fairer name: it was the celebrated
'healthiness' of the cultural philistines. After this latest information,
however, it might be advisable henceforth to refer to them, not as the
'healthy', but as the weaklings or, more strongly, as the weak. If only
these weak were not in possession of the power! What can it matter to
them what they are called! For they are the masters, and he is no
genuine master who cannot endure a mocking nickname. Indeed,
provided one possesses the power, one is even free to mock at one­
self. It does not really matter then whether one exposes oneself to
attack: for what does the purple, the mantle of triumph, not protect!
The strength of the cultural philistine comes to light when he admits
his weakness: and the more often and more cynically he admits it,
the more clearly he betrays his feelings of self-importance and
superiority. This is the age of cynical philistine confessions. As Friedrich
Vischer made aural confession, so David Strauss has confessed with
a book: that aural confession was cynical, and so is this book of
confessions.
1 3
David Strauss makes a twofold confession regarding philistine cul­
ture: confession by word and confession by deed - the word of the con-
fessor and the deed of the writer. His book entitled The Old Faith and the
New is, with regard to its content and with regard to its quality as a
book and the production of a writer, an uninterrupted confession;
and that he should permit himself to make public confession as to
his beliefs at all already constitutes a confession. * - It may be that
everyone over forty has the right to compile an autobiography, for
even the humblest of us may have experienced and seen from closer
quarters things which the thinker may find worth noticing. But to
depose a confession of one's beliefs must be considered incom­
parably more presumptuous, since it presupposes that the writer
accords value, not merely to what he has experienced or discovered
or seen during his life, but even to what he has believed. Now, the
last thing the real thinker will wish to know is what kind of beliefs are
agreeable to such natures as Strauss or; what it is they 'have half
dreamily cobbled together' (p. 1 0) in regard to things of which only
he who knows them at first hand has a right to speak. Who could
need the confessions of belief of a Ranke or a Mommsen, even
though they are scholars and historians of an order quite different
from David Strauss? As soon as they sought to interest us in their
beliefs rather than in their knowledge they would be overstepping
their bounds in a very annoying fashion. But this is what Strauss
does when he tells us of his beliefs. No one wishes to know anything
about them, except perhaps certain narrow-minded opponents of
the Straussian dogmas who feel that there must lie behind them a
system of truly diabolical principles and would no doubt want
Strauss to compromise his learned utterances by betraying this
diabolical background. Perhaps these uncouth fellows have even
benefited from Strauss's latest book; the rest of us, however, who
have had no reason to suspect the existence of such a diabolical
background, have done no such thing - we would, indeed, have
been grateful if we had found a little diabolism in these pages. For the
voice of Strauss speaking of his new faith is certainly not the voice of
an evil spirit: it is not the voice of a spirit at all, let alone that of an
actual genius. It is the voice of those people whom Strauss
introduces to us as his 'we' - they are, he says, 'scholars and artists,
* Strauss's Der alte und neue Glaube was published in 1872. Nietzsche's page references
are to the original edition. An English translation by Mathilde Blind appeared in
1873.
1 4
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
office workers and soldiers, tradesman and landed proprietors, in
their thousands and by no means the worst in the land' - and who,
when they tell us of their beliefs, bore us even more than when they
tell us of their dreams. When they choose to break their silence and
noise their confessions, the volume of their unisono must not be
allowed to deceive us as to the poverty and vulgarity of the tune they
sing. How can the knowledge that a belief is shared by many make us
more favourably disposed towards it when we also know that if any
one of the many ventured to tell us of it we should not let him finish
but interrupt him with a yawn? If you have such a belief, we should
have to tell him, for God's sake keep quiet about it. It may be that in
earlier years a few simple people sought a thinker in David Strauss:
now they have discovered him to be a believer and are disappointed.
If he had stayed silent* he would have remained a philosopher, at
least so far as these people are concerned: now he is a philosopher to
no one. But he no longer desires the honour of being a thinker; he
wants only to be a new believer, and is proud of his 'new faith'. Con­
fessing it in writing, he thinks he is inscribing the catechism 'of mod­
ern ideas' and constructing the broad 'universal highway of the
future' . In fact, our philistine no longer hesitates to say anything, but
has grown self-assured to the point of cynicism. There was a time- a
very distant time, to be sure - when the philistine was tolerated as
something that said nothing and of which nothing was said: there
was another time when one flattered his oddities, found him amus­
ing and talked about him. This attention gradually turned him into a
coxcomb and he began to take an inordinate pride in his oddities
and ingenuous queer-headedness: now he himself talks, often in the
manner of Riehl's music for the home. 'But what is this I see! Is it
phantom or reality? How long and broad my poodle grows!'t For
now he is already trundling like a hippopotamus along the 'universal
highway of the future' and his growling and barking has changed
into the proud accents of the founder of a religion. Are you perhaps
thinking, Master, of founding the religion of the future? 'It seems to
me that the time has not yet come. It does not even occur to me to
want to destroy any existing church' (p. 8). - But why not, Master? All
that matters is that one is able to. Besides, to speak frankly, you your­
self believe you are able to: you have only to look at the last page of
your book. There you say that your new highway 'is the sole uni-
'''if he had stayed silent': Nietzsche's German version of the Latin 'si tacuisses,
philosophus mansisses'
tFrom Goethe's Faust, Part I Scene 3.
1 5
versal highway of the future, which needs only to be gradually com­
pleted and above all more travelled along for it to become pleasant
and comfortable'. Therefore deny it no longer: the founder of a
religion has been unmasked, the new, pleasant and comfortable
road to the Straussian paradise has been constructed. All you are not
yet content with, you modest man, is the carriage in which you wish
to drive us; you tell us in your closing words: 'that the carriage to
which my valued readers have had to entrust themselves with me
meets every requirement I would not venture to assert' (p. 367): 'we
have been much buffeted about'. Ah hal you are fishing for compli­
ments, you coquettish religion-founder! We, however, would prefer
to tell you the truth. If your reader prescribes himself the 368 pages
of your religious catechism at the rate of one page every day of the
year
if, that is to say, he takes it in the ąmallest possible doses - we
believe that at the end of it he will feel unwell: out of vexation that it
has failed to produce any effect. Gulped down in mouthfuls,
however, as much as possible at once according to the prescription
for all timely books, the draught can do ItO harm: far from feeling
vexed and unwell, the drinker will be in a merry and happy mood,
just as though nothing has happened, no religion had been de­
stroyed, no universal highway constructed, no confession made -
and that is what I call an effect! Physician and medicaments and
sickness all forgotten! And the joyful laughter! The continual incite­
ment to laughter! You are to be envied, dear sir, for you have founded
the most agreeable religion in the world: a religion whose founder is
continually honoured by being laughed at.
The philistine as the founder of the religion of the future - that is the
new faith in its most impressive shape; the philistine become a
visionary - that is the unheard-of phenomenon that distinguishes
Germany today. Let us, however, preserve for the moment a degree
of caution in regard to this visionary enthusiasm: has David Strauss
himself not urged such caution upon us, in the following passage (p.
80), in which, to be sure, we are supposed to recognize in the first
instance not Strauss but the founder of Christianity: 'We know there
have been noble, gifted visionaries, a visionary can arouse and exalt
us, and can produce a very lasting effect historically; but let us not
choose him as our life-guide. He will lead us astray if we do not sub­
ject his influence to the control of reason.' We know even more,
1 6
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
indeed: there have also been ungifted visionaries, visionaries who do
not arouse and fire us and yet intend to produce a very lasting effect
historically as life-guides and to dominate the future: how much
more is it incumbent upon us to subject their visionary enthusiasm
to the control of reason. Lichtenberg even says: 'There are enthusi­
astic visionaries devoid of ability, and these are truly dangerous
people.' For the present, and in aid of this control by reason, we
would like an honest answer to three questions. First: how does the
new believer imagine his Heaven? Secondly: how far does the
courage bestowed on him by the new faith extend? And thirdly: how
does he write his books? Strauss the confessor shall answer the first
and second questions for us, Strauss the writer the third.
The Heaven of the new believer will naturally have to be a Heaven
on earth: for the Christian 'prospect of an immortal Heavenly life'
has, together with the other consolations of Christianity, 'irrevocably
fallen away' for him who has 'even one foot' in the Straussian camp
(p. 364). There is some significance in how a religion elects to depict
its Heaven: and if it be true that Christianity knows no other
Heavenly occupation than music-making and singing, then the
Strauss ian philistine cannot very well be expected to look forward to
it. The confessional book does, however, contain one paradisial
page, page 294: unroll this parchment first of all, most fortunate
philistine! All Heaven.will there climb down to you. 'We shall give
only an indication', Strauss says, 'of what we do, of what we have
done these many years. Besides our profession - for we belong to the
most varied professions, we are by no means only scholars or artists
but also office workers and soldiers, tradesmen and landed pro­
prietors, and, to say it again, there are not a few of us but many thou­
sands and not the worst in any country
besides our profession, I
say, we try to keep our minds as open as possible to all the higher
interests of mankind: during recent years we have participated in the
liveliest way in the great national war and the construction of the
German state, and we feel ourselves profoundly uplifted by this
turn, as glorious as it was unexpected, in the history of our much­
tried nation. We assist our understanding of these things through
historical studies, which have now been made easy even for the
unlearned by a series of attractive and popularly written historical
works; at the same time, we seek to broaden our knowledge of
nature, for which there is likewise no lack of aids accessible to the
common understanding; and lastly, we find in the writings of our
great poets, in performances of the works of our great composers, a
1 7
stimulus for the spirit and the heart, for the imagination and the
sense of humour, that leaves nothing to be desired. Thus we live and
go our way rejoicing.'
This is our man, cries the philistine who reads this: for that is how
we live, how we live every day! * And what a nice turn of phrase he
has to describe things! When, for example, he refers to historical
studies by means of which we assist our understanding of the politi­
cal situation, what can he be referring to but newspaper-reading,
and when he speaks of our lively participation in the construction of
the German state, what can he mean but our daily visits to the public
house? and is a stroll through the zoo not what is meant by 'aids
accessible to the common understanding' through which we
broaden our knowledge of nature? And finally
the theatres and
concerts from which we take home 'stimuli for the imagination and
sense of humour' which 'leave nothing to be desired' - how wittily he
dignifies these dubious activities! This is our man: for his Heaven is
our Heaven!
Thus the philistine cries and rejoices: and if we are not as con­
tented as he is, the reason is that we wanted to know more. Scaliger
asked: 'What is it to us whether Montaigne drank red wine or white!'
But in this more important case how much we should treasure such
detailed information! If only we could know how many pipes the
philistine must smoke each day according to the dictates of the new
faith, and whether he prefers the Spener or the National-Zeitung
when he is drinking his coffee. Our thirst for knowledge is not satis­
fied! On only one point do we receive something of what we desire,
but this, happily, concerns the philistine's Heaven of Heavens: the
private little aesthetic closets consecrated to the great poets and com­
posers in which the philistine not merely 'edifies' himself but in
which, according to his confession, 'all his blemishes are effaced and
washed away' (p. 363); so that we appear to have to envisage these
closets as kinds of little bathrooms. 'But that is only for fleeting
moments, it happens only in the realm of the imagination and is
valid only therein; as soon as we return to rude reality and the daily
round, the old cares descend upon us again from all sides' - thus
sighs our teacher, Strauss. Yet if we employ the fleeting moments for
which we are allowed to linger in those little closets, there will be just
enough time to view from all sides a picture of the ideal philistine,
that is to say the philistine from whom all blemishes have been washed away
and who is now the philistine type in all its purity. What here pre-
*This phrase is from a German students' song.
1 8
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
sents itself is, in all seriousness, instructive: let no one who has fallen
victim to the confessional book let it go without having read the
excursus 'on our great poets' or that 'on our great composers'. Here
there extends the rainbow of the new guild, and he who cannot take
joy in it 'is beyond all help', is, as Strauss says on another occasion
but could also say here, 'not yet ripe for our viewpoint'. For we are,
remember, in the Heaven of Heavens. The enthusiastic peripatetic
sets about leading us around, and apologizes if, carried away by the
pleasure he takes in all these wonderful things, he talks a little too
much. 'If I perchance grow more loquacious than is thought
appropriate to the occasion', he tells us, 'I ask the reader's
indulgence: out of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaketh. Let
him be assured, however, that what he is now going to read is not
drawn from earlier writings and inserted here, but written for the
present purpose and the present place' (p. 296). This confession
momentarily staggers us. of what interest can it be to us whether or
not these charming little chapters are newly written! If only it were a
matter of writing! Between ourselves, I wish they had been written 25
years ago: for then I would know why the ideas in them seem to me
so pallid and why the odour of mouldering antiques adheres to
them. But that something written in 1 87 2  should smell mouldy in
1 872 arouses my suspicions. Suppose someone fell asleep while
reading these chapters and imbibing their odour- what would he be
likely to dream about? A friend of mine gave me the answer, for it
happened to him. He dreamed of a waxworks show: the classic
authors stood there, delicately imitated in wax and gems. They
moved their arms and eyes and a screw inside them squeaked as they
did so. He then saw something uncanny, a formless figure draped in
ribbons and gilt paper with a label hanging from its mouth and
'Lessing' written on it; my friend said he stepped closer and learned
the worst: it was the Homeric chimera, Strauss in front, Gervinus
behind, in the middle chimera - in summa, Lessing. This discovery
wrung from him a scream of fear, he awoke and read no further.
Why, Master, did you ever write such mouldy little chapters!
We do, to be sure, learn a few novelties from them: for example,
that Gervinus has taught us how and why Goethe possessed no talent
for the drama, that in the second part of Faust he has produced only a
schematic allegory; that Wallenstein is a Macbeth who is at the same
time Hamlet;* that the Straussian reader plucks out the stories from
the Wanderjahre in the way illbred children pluck the almonds and
* 1 11 Schiller's three-pan drama H'(/l1l'11sll'ill.
1 9
nil
:: 1
9 I
: :1
. 1
raisins out of a tough cake;'Ā that without thrills and extreme situ­
ations nothing on the stage can make any real effect; and that Schiller
emerged from Kant as from a hydropathic establishment. All this is
certainly new and striking, even if it does not strike us very pleas andy;
and, as surely as it is new, just as surely it will never grow old, for it
was never young: it came into the world already old. What ideas the
new-style blessed come across in their aesthetic Heaven! And why
have they not forgotten at any rate some of them, especially when
they are as unaesthetic and earthly-ephemeral and bear the stamp of
stupidity as visibly as, for example, some of the opinions of
Gervinus! But it almost seems as though the modest greatness of a
Strauss and the immodest minimality of a Gervinus can get on
together only too well: and so hail to all these blessed ones, and hail
to us unblessed ones as well, if this undoubted judge of art goes on
teaching his acquired enthusiasm and his coach-horse gallop, of
which honest Grillparzer has spoken with all due clarity, and all
Heaven resounds with the hoofbeats' of this galloping enthusiasm!
Things would at least be a bit livelier than tihey are at present, when
the creeping carpet-slippered enthusiasm of our heavenly leader
and the lukewarm eloquence of his mouth in the long run only
weary and disgust us. I would like to know how a Hallelujah would
sound in the mouth of Strauss: I imagine one would have to listen
very closely or it would sound like a polite apology or a whispered
compliment. I can relate an instructive and appalling example of
this. Strauss took grave exception to references by one of his op­
ponents to his bowing and scraping before Lessing- the unfortunate
man had misunderstood him -; Strauss, to be sure, asserted that the
man must be a numbskull not to recognize that the simple words he
had used of Lessing in section got had come straight from the
warmth of his heart. Now, I have no doubt at all as to the existence of
this warmth; on the contrary, I have always felt that this warmth of
approval of Lessing on the part of Strauss had something suspect
about it; I find the same suspect approval of Lessing raised to steam­
heat in Gervinus; indeed, none of the great German writers is in
general so popular with the litde German writers as Lessing is; and
yet they deserve no thanks for it: for what is it in Lessing that really
wins their approval? First, his universality: he is a critic and a poet,
an archaeologist and a philosopher, a theorist of drama and a
*Goethe's novel Wilhelm Mei.sters Waruleryahre ( 1 82 1-9), which contains inset stories.
t'section 90' refers to The Old Faith and the New.
David Strauss; the confessor and the writer
theologian. Then, 'this unity of the writer and the man, of the head
and the heart'. The latter quality distinguishes every great writer, and
sometimes even the little writer, for a narrow mind gets on
fabulously well with a narrow heart. And the former quality, univer­
sality, is in itself no distinction at all, especially as in Lessing's case it
was a mere necessity. What is, rather, to be marvelled at in these
Lessing enthusiasts is precisely that they fail to notice this consuming
necessity which pursued Lessing throughout his life and forced
upon him his 'universality'; that they fail to realize that such a man is
consumed too quickly, like a flame, and are not indignant that this
tender, ardent being was darkened, tormented and suffocated by the
vulgar narrowness and poverty of his whole environment, and
especially that of his learned contemporaries; that they fail to
understand, indeed, that this admired universality is something that
ought to evoke, not admiration, but a profound feeling of pity.
'Commiserate with the extraordinary man', Goethe cries to us, 'that
he lived in so miserable' an age he had constantly to exert himself
polemically.'* How, my dear philistines, can you think of Lessing
without a feeling of shame: he who perished of your stupidity, in
conflict with your ludicrous totems and idols, through the wretched
state of your theatres, your scholars, your theologians, without even
once being able to venture that eternal flight for which he had come
into the world. And what do you feel when you remember
Winckelmann, who, to free his sight of your grotesque absurdities,
went begging for help to the Jesuits and whose shameful conversion
dishonours not him but you? Do you even dare to speak the name of
Schiller and not blush? Look at this picture! The flashing eyes that
gaze contemptuously out over your heads, the deathly flushed
cheeks - do these say nothing to you? Here was a glorious, divine toy
which you broke. And if this curtailed and mortally harassed life had
been deprived of Goethe's friendship it would have been your part
to extinguish it even sooner! None of your great geniuses has ever
received any assistance from you, and do you now want to make it a
dogma that none ever shall receive any? To each of them you were
that 'resistance of the obtuse world' which Goethe names in his
epilogue to Schiller's Glocke; to each of them you showed annoyance
and lack of understanding, or envious narrow-mindedness, or
malice and egoism: it was in spite of you they created their works,
against you they directed their attacks, and it was thanks to you they
"' Goethe to Eckermann, 7 February 1 827.
2 1
p
sank down too soon, their work unfinished, broken or deadened by
the struggle. And are you now to be permitted, tamquam re bene gesta, *
to praise such men! and to do so in words which reveal unmistakably
whom it is you have in mind when you utter such praise, which then
'gushes so warmly from the heart' that one would have to be blind
not to see towards whom your obeisances are really directed. Even in
his day, Goethe felt impelled to exclaim: 'Truly, we are in need of a
Lessing!' and woe to all vain teachers and to the whole aesthetic
heavenly kingdom if the young tiger, his restless energy visible in
swelling muscles and the glance of his eye, should ever set out in
search of prey!
How wise my friend was that, enlightened by this chimerical figure
as to the nature of the Straussian Lessing and of Strauss himself, he
forbore to read further. We read further, however, and went on to
beg entry into the musical sanctum of p new faith. The Master
opened the door, attended at our side, explained, named names - at
last we stopped mistrustfully and looked at him: were we not
experiencing the .same thing as happened to our poor friend in his
dream? So long as he was speaking of them, the composers of whom
Strauss spoke seemed to us to be wrongly named, and we felt he
must be referring to someone else, if not to mere teasing phantoms.
When, for example, he takes, with the same warmth as had made us
suspicious when he praised Lessing, the name of Haydn into his
mouth and gives himself out for an epopt and priest of a Haydnesque
mystery cult, while at the same time (p. 362) comparing Haydn with
'honest soup' and Beethoven with 'confectionary' (in reference to the
quartets, of all things), we are certain of only one thing: his
co nfectio nary-Beethoven is not our Beethoven, and his soup-Haydn
is not our Haydn. The Master finds, moreover, that our orchestras
are too good to perform his Haydn and believes that this music is
suited only to the most modestly competent dilettanti - again a proof
that he is referring to a different artist and to different works of art
(perhaps to Riehl's music for the home).
But who could this Straussian confectio nary-Beethoven be? He is
supposed to have written nine symphonies, of which the 'Pastoral' is
'the least inspired'; we discover that at every third of them he is
*tamquam re bene gesta: as if things had turned out well
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
impelled 'to kick over the traces and go off on an adventure', which
almost suggests to us a cross-bred creature, half horse, half knight
errant. In regard to a certain 'Eroica' it is seriously stated of this cen­
taur that he has failed to make it clear 'whether what is going on is a
conflict on the batdefield or in the depths of the human heart'. hi the
'Pastoral' there is an 'excellent storm' which is, however, far too good
to interrupt a mere peasants' dance; and it is through this 'capricious
continual association' of the music with its 'trivial underlying oc­
casion', as Strauss so neady and correctly calls it, that this symphony
is 'the least inspired' - an even harsher word seems to have hovered
in the mind of our classical Master but, as he tells us, he preferred to
express himself here 'with befitting modesty'. But no, here he is for
once in the wrong, here he really is too modest. For who else is to
instruct us about the confectionary-Beethoven if not Strauss himself,
the only one who seems to know him? There immediately follows,
moreover, the enunciation of a firm and befittingly immodest judg­
ment, this time on the Ninth Symphony: this work, it seems, may be
loved only by those to whom 'the baroque counts as a mark of genius
and the formless as the sublime' (p. 359) . It is true that so stern a
critic as Gervinus gave it a welcome, namely as a confirmation of one
of his own dogmas: he, Strauss, is however very far from seeking the
merits of his Beethoven in such 'problematic productions'. 'It is a
pity', sighs our Master sadly, 'that our enjoyment of Beethoven and
the admiration we gladly accord him must be diminished by reser­
vations of this kind.' For our Master is a favourite of the muses, and
they have told him that they went only a stretch of the way with
Beethoven and that he thereafter again lost sight of them. 'This is a
defect', he cries, 'but can one believe that it also appears as a merit?'
'He who trundles along the musical idea with toil and out of breath
will appear to be the stronger and to move what is heavier' (pp. 355-
6). This is a confession, and in regard not only to Beethoven but to
the 'classic prose-writer' himself: the muses never let go of him, the
celebrated author: from the lightest play of wit - Straussian wit, that
is - to the heights of seriousness - Straussian seriousness, that is -
they stay imperturbably at his side. He, the classic artist in writing,
carries his burden with playful ease, while Beethoven trundles his
along out of breath. He seems to dally with his load: there is a merit;
but can one believe that it might appear as a defect? - But at the most
only to those to whom the baroque counts as a mark of genius and
the formless as the sublime - is that not so, you dallying favourite of
the muses?
We begrudge no one the edification he acquires for himself in the
silence of his room or in the new heavenly kingdom arranged for the
purpose; but of all possible forms of edification the Straussian is one
of the strangest; for he edifies himself at a little sacrificial fire into
which he casually casts the sublimest works of the German nation in
order to perfume his idols with the smoke they produce. Let us
imagine for a moment that the 'Eroica', the 'Pastoral' and the Ninth
had chanced to get into the hands of our priest of the muses and that
it had then depended upon him to keep Beethoven's image spotless
through the removal of such 'problematical productions'
who can
doubt that he would have burned them? And that is how the
Strausses of our day in fact proceed: they want to know of an artist
only that by which he is suited for their domestic service, and can see
no alternative but using him as perfume or burning him. This, of
course, they should be at liberty to do: the only strange thing about it
is that public opinion in aesthetic matters is so insipid, uncertain and
easily misled that it beholds such an exhibition of the sorriest philis­
tinism without protest, that it lacks, indeediJ any feeling for the comi­
cality of a scene in which an unaesthetic magistrate sits in judgment
on Beethoven. And as for Mozart, there ought truly to apply to him
what Aristotle said of Plato: 'the bad man is not permitted even to
praise him'. Here, however, all shame has been lost, on the part of
the public as much as on that of the Master; not only is he permitted
to cross himself before the greatest and purest products of the German
genius as though he had beheld something godless and indecent,
but his candid confessions of sins are received with delight,
especially as he confesses not sins he himself has committed, but
those supposedly committed by our great spirits. 'Ah, if only our
Master really was always right!' his admiring readers sometimes
think in an access of doubt; he himself, however, stands there, smiling
and certain, perorating, damning and blessing, doffing his hat to
himself, and capable at any moment of saying what the duchess
Delafone said to Madame de Stael: 'I have to admit, my dear friend,
that 1 know of nobody who is always right except me.'
To the worm a corpse is a pleasant thought, and to everything living
a worm is a dreadful one. The worm's idea of Heaven is a fat carcass,
the philosophy professor's is grubbing about in the entrails of
Schopenhauer, and as long as there are rats there will also be a rat
David Straussj the confessor and the writer
Heaven. This provides the answer to our first question: how does the
new believer imagine his Heaven? The Straussian philistine lodges
in the works of our great poets and composers like a worm which
lives by destroying, admires by consuming, reveres by digesting.
Now we come to our second question: how far does -the courage
bestowed on him by the new faith extend? This too would already
have been answered if courage were identical with immodesty: for in
that case Strauss would possess the courage of a Mameluke - for that
befitting modesty of which he speaks in the passage on Beethoven
just alluded to is only a stylistic device, not a moral position. Strauss
has sufficient of that impudence to which every victorious hero feels
himself entitled; every flower that blooms belongs to him, the victor,
alone, and he lauds the sun for illuminating his window. Even the
ancient, venerable universe does not remain untouched by his com­
mendations, as though they alone could consecrate it and it must .
henceforth revolve only about the central monad, Strauss. The
universe, he informs us; is a machine with iron wheels and cogs and
heavy pistons and rams, 'but merciless cogs are not all that move
within it, there also flows a soothing oil' (p. 365). The universe will
not be precisely grateful to our image-mad Master that he can find
no better metaphor with which to commend it, if indeed it takes any
pleasure at all in being commended by Strauss. What is this oil called
which trickles down on to the pistons and rams? And of what con­
solation could it be to the worker within this machine to know that
this oil is being poured on to him while the machine continues to
hold him in its grip? Let us say simply that the metaphor is an unfor­
tunate one and turn our attention to another procedure through
which Strauss seeks to convey how he really feels towards the
universe and in the course of which there hovers upon his lips the
question Gretchen kept asking: 'He loves me - he loves me not - he
loves me?'* If while he is doing this Strauss does not pluck the petals
from a flower or count the buttons on a coat, what he does do is no
less harmless, though it perhaps requires a little more courage.
Strauss wants to see whether or not his feeling for the 'cosmos' has
become paralysed and dead, and he jabs himself: for he knows that
one can jab one's arm with a needle quite painlessly so long as the
arm is paralysed and dead. In reality, to be sure, he does not jab him­
self, he chooses an even more violent procedure, which he describes
thus: 'We open Schopenhauer, who loses no opportunity of striking
>lOIn Goethe's Faust, Part I Scene 1 2.
our idea in the face' (p. 1 43). But since it is not an idĆa, even the
fairest Straussian idea of the universe, that has a face, but he who has
the idea, the procedure here described consists of the following
individual
acts:
Strauss
opens
Schopenhauer,
whereupon
Schopenhauer takes the opportunity to strike Strauss in the face.
Strauss now 'reacts', and does so 'religiously', that is to say he strikes
back at Schopenhauer, berates him, speaks of absurdities, blas­
phemies, infamies, even asserts that Schopenhauer was out of his
mind. The outcome of this cudgelling: 'we demand for our universe
the same piety as the devout of the old stamp do for their God' -
more briefly: 'he loves me!' He makes things hard for himself, our
favourite of the muses, but he is as brave as a Mameluke and fears
neither the Devil nor Schopenhauer. How much 'soothing oil'
would he not use up if he indulged in such procedures very
often!
On the other hand, we realize the debt Strauss actually owes to the
titillating, jabbing and cudgelling Schopenhauer; and the following
express act of kindness towćds him therei>re fails to occasion in us
any further surprise. 'It is necessary only to leaf through Arthur
Schopenhauer's writings, though one would also do well, not merely
to leaf through them, but to study them' etc. (p. 1 41). To whom is the
chieftain of the philistines really addressing these words? - he of
whom it can be proved that he has never studied Schopenhauer, he
of whom Schopenhauer himself would have to have said: 'this is an
author who does not deselVe to be leafed through, let alone studied'.
It is obvious that he swallowed Schopenhauer the wrong way: by
coughing and spluttering he is trying to get rid of him. But so that the
measure of naive commendation shall be full, Strauss permits him­
self to recommend old Kant: he calls Kant's Allgemeine Geschichte und
Theone des Himmels of 1 755 'a work which has always seemed to me no
less significant than his later critique of reason. If in the latter what
one must admire is profundity of insight, in the former it is exten­
siveness of oudook; if in the latter we see the aged philosopher
engaged in securing a domain of knowledge, even if a limited one, in
the former we encounter a man filled with all the courage of the
spiritual discoverer and conqueror.' This judgment of Kant on the
part of Strauss has always seemed to me no more modest than his
judgment of Schopenhauer: if in the latter we see the chieftain
engaged above all in securing the expression of a judgment, albeit a
very limited one, in the former we encounter the celebrated prose­
writer who, with all the courage of ignorance, empties his vial of
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
commendation even upon Kant. The quite incredible fact that
Strauss has no notion how to derive from Kant's critique of reason
support for his testament of modern ideas, and that everywhere he
flatters nothing but the crudest kind of realism, is among the most
striking characteristics of this new gospel, which presents .itself
moreover only as the arduously attained outcome of continuous his­
torical and scientific research and therewith denies any involvement
with philosophy at all. For the philistine chieftain and his 'we' there
is no such thing as the Kantian philosophy. He has no notion of the
fundamental antinomies of idealism or of the extreme relativity of
all science and reason. Or: it is precisely reason that ought to tell him
how little of the in-itself of things can be determined by reason. But it
is true that people of a certain age find it impossible to understand
Kant, especially if in their youth they have, like Strauss, understood,
or thought they understood, the 'gigantic spirit' Hegel, and have also
had to occupy themselves with Schleiermacher, 'who', as Strauss
says, 'possessed almost too much acuteness'. It will sound strange to
Strauss when I tell him that even now he is in a state of 'absolute
dependence' on Hegel and Schleiermacher, and that his doctrine of
the universe, his way of regarding things sub specie bienni, * his grovelling
before the realities of present-day Germany, above all his shameless
philistine optimism, are to be elucidated by reference to certain
early youthful impressions, habits and pathological phenomena. He
who has once contracted Hegelism and Schleiermacherism is never
quite cured of them.
There is one passage in the confessional book in which this in­
curable optimism goes strolling along with a downright holiday air
of complacency (pp. 1 42-3). 'If the world is a thing that it were better
did not exist', says Strauss, 'well then, the thought of the philosopher,
which constitutes a piece of this world, is a thought that it were better
was not thought. The pessimistic philosopher does not see that he
declares his own thought bad when his thought declares the world
bad; but if a thought which declares the world bad is itself bad thinking,
then the world is, on the contrary, good. Optimism may as a rule
make things too easy for itself, and here Schopenhauer's insistence
on the role which pain and evil play in the world is quite in order; but
every true philosophy is necessarily optimistic, since otherwise it
denies its own right to exist.' If this refutation of Schopenhauer is not
"sub specie bienni: literally, 'under the aspect of two years' - Nietzsche's ironic adap­
tation of the well-known phrase 'sub specie aeternitatis'.
the same as that which in another place Strauss calls a 'refutation to
the loud rejoicing of the higher spheres', then I do not understand
this theatrical expression, which he once employed against an op­
ponent. Optimism has here for once deliberately made things too
easy for itself. But the trick of the thing was precisely to make it look
as though refuting Schopenhauer was no bother at all and to cast
one's burden off with such playful ease that the three muses would
take continual delight in the dallying optimist. This is to be achieved
by showing that there is no need whatever to take a pessimist
seriously: the vainest sophistries will do for dealing with so
'unhealthy and unprofitable' a philosophy as Schopenhauer's, upon
which one needs to expend, not reasons, but at the most jokes and
phrases. In the light of such passages as this, one comprehends
Schopenhauer's solemn assertion that, where it is not the thought­
less chatter of those beneath whose flat cranium there are no
thoughts but only words, optimism seems to him not merely an
absurd but also a truly infamous mode of thinking, a bitter mockery of the
nameless sufferings of mankind. When the philistine reduces it to a
system, as Strauss does, he also reduces it to an infamous mode of
thinking, that is to say to an inordinately stupid ease-and­
contentment doctrine for the benefit of the 'ego', or of his 'we', and
he arouses indignation.
Who, for example, could read the following psychological
elucidation without feeling indignation, since it can quite clearly
have sprung only from the stem of this infamous ease-and­
contentment theory: 'Beethoven said he would never have been able
to compose such a text as Figaro or Don Giovanni. Life had not smiled
upon him to the extent that he could have adopted so cheerful a view of it as to
take the weaknesses of mankind so lightly' (p. 36 1). But the worst example
of this infamous vulgarity of mind is supplied in the fact that Strauss
knows no other way of explaining to himself the whole dreadfully
serious drive to self-abnegation and to salvation in asceticism
evidenced in the first centuries of Christianity than by supposing it
to have originated in a preceding surfeit of sexual indulgence of all
kinds and the disgust and nausea that resulted:
'The Persians call it bidamag buden,
The Gennans say Katz.enjammer.' *
Strauss himself quotes these lines and is not ashamed. We, however,
turn aside for a moment to overcome our disgust.
« Katzenjammer: a hangover; remorse for the previous night's debauch. The couplet
is from Goethe's West-iistlicher Divan.
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
Our philistine chieftain is indeed brave with words to the point of
rashness whenever he believes he will give delight to his noble 'we'
through such bravery. Thus, the asceticism and self-abnegation of
the saints and hermits of old may count as a form of Kalzenjarnmer,
Jesus may be described as a visionary who would in our day hardly
escape the madhouse, the story of the resurrection may be called a
'piece of world-historical humbug' - let us for once let all this pass,
so that we may study the singular courage of which Strauss, our
'classic philistine', is capable.
Let us first hear his confession: 'To tell the world what it least
wants to hear is, to be sure, a displeasing and thankless office. It likes
to live unstintingly, like a great lord, it receives and pays out for as
long as it has anything to pay with: but when someone comes along
to reckon up the items and hands it the bill, it regards him as a
mischief-maker. And precisely that is what my head and heart have
always impelled me to do.' Such a head and heart may well be called
courageous, yet it remains doubtful whether this courage is natural
and original, or whether it is not rather acquired and artificial;
perhaps Strauss accustomed himself to being a mischief-maker by
profession only gradually, until he had acquired from this pro­
fession the courage for it. That would accord very well with natural
cowardice, such as is proper to the philistine: it reveals itself
especially in the inconsequentiaiity of those assertions which it takes
courage to make; there is the sound of thunder, but there follows no
clearing of the air. He cannot manage an aggressive act, only
aggressive words, but he chooses the most offensive words he can
find and exhausts all his force and energy in uncouth and blustering
expressions: when his words have died away he is more cowardly
than he who has never spoken. Even the phantom form of actions,
ethics, reveals that he is a hero only of words, and that he avoids
every occasion on which it is necessary to proceed from words to
grim earnest. He announces with admirable frankness that he is no
longer a Christian, but he does not wish to disturb anyone's peace of
mind; it seems to him contradictory to found an association in order
to overthrow an association - which is in fact not so very contradic­
tory. With a cenain rude contentment he covers himselfin the hairy
cloak of our ape-genealogists and praises Darwin as one of the
greatest benefactors of mankind - but it confuses us to see that his
ethics are constructed entirely independently of the question: 'What
is our conception of the world?' Here was an opportunity to exhibit
native courage: for here he ought to have turned his back on his 'we'
and boldly derived a moral code for life out of the bellum omnium contra
omnes * and the privileges of the strong - though such a code would,
to be sure, have to originate in an intrepid mind such as that of Hobbes,
and in a grand love of truth quite different from that which explodes
only in angry outbursts against priests, miracles and the 'world­
historical humbug' of the resurrection. For with a genuine Darwinian
ethic, seriously and consistently carried through, he would have had
against him the philistine whom with such outbursts he attracts to
his side.
'All moral behaviour' says Strauss, 'is a self-determination of the
individual according to the idea of the species.' Translated into com­
prehensible language, all this means is: Live as a man and not as an
ape or a seal! Unfortunately this imperative is altogether without
force and useless, because the concept of man yokes together the
most diverse and manifold things, for example the Patagonian and
Master Strauss, and because no one will venture to demand: 'Live as
a Patagonian!' and at the same time 'LivCi as Master Strauss!' If,
however, anyone should go so far as to demand of himself: 'Live as a
genius', that is to say as the ideal expression of the species man, but
happened to be either a Patagonian or Master Strauss, how we would
then have to suffer from the importunities of natural fools thirsting
for genius Lichtenberg in his day already had to complain of their
mushroom-like growth in Germany - and demanding of us with
wild cries that we listen to their latest confessions of faith. Strauss has
not yet even learned that no idea can ever make men better or more
moral, and that preaching morals is as easy as finding grounds for
them is difficult; his task was much rather to take the phenomena of
human goodness, compassion, love and self-abnegation, which do
in fact exist, and derive and explain them from his Darwinist pre­
suppositions: while he preferred by a leap into the imperative to flee
from the task of explanation. In making this leap he is even able to
elude, with an easy and frivolous hop, Darwin's fundamental prop­
osition. 'Do not ever forget', says Struass, 'that you are a man and not
a mere creature of nature: do not ever forget that all others are
likewise men, that is to say, with all their individual differences the
same as you, with the same needs and demands as you
that is the
epitome of all morality.' But whence sounds this imperative? How
can man possess it in himself, since, according to DaIWin, he is pre-
"bellum omnium contra omnes: war of all against all
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
cisely a creature of nature and nothing else, and has evolved to the
height of being man by quite other laws: precisely, in fact, by always
forgetting that other creatures similar to him possessed equivalent
rights, precisely by feeling himself the stronger and gradually
eliminating the other, weaker examples of his species? While Strauss
is obliged to assume that no two creatures have been exactly similar,
and that the entire evolution of man from the level of the animals up
to the heights of the cultural philistine depends upon the law of dif­
ferences between individuals, he finds no difficulty in enunciating
the opposite: 'behave as though there were no differences between
individuals!' Where has the moral teaching of Strauss-Darwin now
gone, where has any courage whatever gone!
We are at once given a fresh demonstration of the point at which
courage is transposed into its opposite. For Strauss continues: 'Do
not ever forget that you and all that you are aware of within and
around you is no disconnected fragment, no wild chaos of atoms
and accidents, but that 'everything proceeds according to eternal
laws out of the one primeval source of all life, all reason and all good­
ness
that is the epitome of religion.' Out of this 'one primeval
source' however, there at the same time flows all destruction, all
unreason, all evil, and Strauss calls this source the universe. But how,
given it possesses so contradictory and self-annulling a character,
should this be worthy of religious veneration and be addressed by
the name 'God', as Strauss himself addresses it (p. 365): 'our God
does not take us into his arms from outside' - here one expects as an
antithesis a certainly very strange 'taking us into his arms from
within'! - 'he opens to us sources of consolation within us. He shows
us that, while chance would be an irrational master of the world,
necessity, i.e. the chain of causes in the world, is reason itself' (a
piece of surreptitiousness which only the 'we' can fail to recognize as
such because they were raised in this Hegelian worship of the real as
the rational, that is to say in thedeiflCationofsuccess). 'He teaches us to see
that to desire an exception to the fulfilment of a single law of nature
would be to desire the destruction of the cosmos.' On the contrary,
Master: an honest natural scientist believes that the world conforms
unconditionally to laws, without however asserting anything as to
the ethical or intellectual value of these laws: he would regard any
such assertions as the extreme anthropomorphism of a reason that
has overstepped the bounds of the permitted. But it is at precisely the
point at which the honest natural scientist resigns that Strauss 'reacts'
-in order to plume us with his feathers -'religiously' , and goes on to
3 1
pursue a consciously dishonest kind of natural science;'he assumes
without question that all events possess the highest intellectual value
and are thus absolutely rational and purposeful, and then that they
contain a revelation of eternal goodness itself. He is thus in need of a
complete cosmodicy and at a disadvantage compared with those
who are concerned only with a theodicy, who conceive the entire
existence of man as, for example, a punishment or a process of
purification. At this point, and thus embarrassed, Strauss goes so far
as to venture for once a metaphysical hypothesis - the driest and
most palsied there has ever been and at bottom no more than an
unconscious parody of a saying of Lessing's. 'That other saying of
Lessing's', he says on page 2 1 9, 'that, if God held all truth in his right
hand and in his left the never-sleeping quest for truth with the con­
dition of continually erring in this quest, and then offered him a
choice between them, he would humbly fall upon God's left hand
and beg for the contents of it - this saying has always been regarded
as among the finest he left to us. There has been found in it an
expression of his restless desire for actiQll and investigation. This
saying has always made so powerful an impression upon me because
behind its subjective significance I have heard resounding an objec­
tive one of immense range. For does it not contain the best reply to
Schopenhauer's crude conception of an ill-advised God who knows
of nothing better to do than to enter into so wretched a world as this
is? May it not be that the Creator himself shares Lessing's opinion
and prefers continual striving to peaceful possession?' A God, that is
to say, who reserves to himself continual error and at the same time a
striving for truth, and who perhaps humbly falls upon Strauss's left
hand and says to him: all truth is for you. If ever a God or a man were
ill-advised it is this Straussian God, with his partiality for error and
failure, and the Straussian man, who has to pay for this partiality
here indeed one can 'hear resounding a significance of immense
range', here there flows Strauss's universal soothing oil, here one
senses something of the rationality of all evolution and natural law!
Does one really? Or would our world not be, rather, as Lichtenberg
once called it, the work of a subordinate being who as yet lacked a
full understanding of his task, and thus an experiment? a novice's
test-piece which was still being worked on? So that Strauss himself
would have to concede that our world is an arena, not of rationality,
but of error, and that its laws and purposefulness are no source of
consolation, since they proceed from a God who is not merely in
error but takes pleasure in being in error. It is a truly delicious spec-
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
tacle to behold Strauss as a metaphysical architect building up into
the clouds. But for whom is this spectacle mounted? For the noble
and contented 'we', so as to preserve their contentment: perhaps
they were overcome by fear in the midst of those merciless wheels of
the universal machine and tremblingly begged their leader for help.
Whereupon Strauss started the 'soothing oil' flowing, led on a God
who errs out of a passion for error, and assumed for once the wholly
uncongenial role of a metaphysical architect. He does all this
because his 'we' are afraid and he himself is afraid - and here we dis­
cover the limits of his courage, even with respect to his 'we'. For he
does not dare to tell them honestly: I have liberated you from a
helpful and merciful God, the universe is only a rigid machine,
take care you are not mangled in its wheels! This he dares not do:
so he has to call in the sorceress, that is to say metaphysics. To the
philistine, however, even a Straussian metaphysic is preferable to
the Christian, and the idea of an erring God more attractive than
that of a miracle-working one. For he himself, the philistine, com­
mits errors, but has never yet performed a miracle.
It is for this very reason that the philistine hates the genius: for the
genius has the justified reputation of performing miracles; and that
is why it is in the highest degree instructive to see why, in one solitary
passage, Strauss for once presents himself as the daring defender of
the genius and of the aristocratic natures of the spirit. Why does he
do it? From fear, this time fear of the social democrats. He refers
them to Bismarck, Moltke, 'whose greatness can be the less denied as
they advance into the realm of palpable action. Now even the most
stiff-necked and surly of these fellows must be constrained to look
upwards a little, so as to get a sight of these exalted figures, even if
only to the knee.' Do you perhaps desire, Master, to give the social
democrats instruction in how to get kicked? The will to deliver such
kicks is to be found everywhere, after all, and that those who are to
get kicked can see only 'to the knee' of these exalted figures seems to
ensure that the kicks will be successfully delivered. 'In the domain of
art and science too', Strauss goes on, 'there will never be a lack of
kings who build and who give work to a host of carters.' Good - but
suppose the carters themselves start to build? It does happen,
metaphysical Master, you know that - then the kings will have to grin
and bear it.
This union of audacity and weakness, of rash words and cowardly
acquiescence, this subtle assessment of how and with what ex­
pressions one can now impress the philistine, now flatter him, this
I
I
I
lack of character and strength masquerading as strength and charac­
ter, this defectiveness in wisdom with the affectation of superiority
and mature experience- all this, in fact, is what I hate in this book. If
I thought that young men could endure such a book, even treasure
it, I would sadly renounce all hope for their future. This confession
of a pitiful, hopeless and truly contemptible philistinism presents
itself as an expression of the views of those many thousands of'we's
of whom Strauss speaks, and these 'we's are in turn the fathers of the
coming generation! These are gruesome presuppositions for anyone
who wants to assist the coming generation to that which the present
does not possess - to a truly German culture. To such a one the
ground seems strewn with ashes and all the stars appear obscured;
every dead tree, every desolate field cries to him: Unfruitful! Lost!
Here there will be no more spring! He has to feel as the youthful
Goethe felt when he looked into the sad atheistical twilight of the Systeme
de fa nature: the book seemed to him so Cimmerian, so stagnant, so
dead, that it cost him an effort to endure its proximity, and he
shuddered in its presence as in the presence of a ghost. ::<
We are now sufficiently instructed as to the new believer's Heaven
and his courage to be able to pose our final question: how does he
write his books? and what is the nature of the scriptures of his
religion?
To him who can answer this question rigorously and without pre­
judice, the fact that Strauss's portable oracle for the German philis­
tine has been in demand to the extent of six editions will present a
problem of the most thought-provoking kind, especially when he
hears that it has also received a warm welcome in scholarly circles
and even in German universities. Students are said to have greeted it
as a syllabus for the training of strong minds and professors are said
not to have objected: here and there the book has been received as a
sacred scripture for scholars. Strauss himself gives us to understand that
the confessional book is not intended to offer instruction only to
scholars and the cultivated, but we adhere to the view that it is di­
rected at these in the first instance, and particularly at the scholars,
"'Systeme de La nature: Baron d'Holbach's once celebrated defence of atheistic
materialism and determinism, published in 1 770. Goethe refers to it in Dichtung und
Wahrheit III.
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
and that it holds up to them the reflection of a life such as they them­
selves live. For this is the trick of the thing: the Master affects to be
oudining the ideal of a new philosophy of life, and now he hears
himself praised on every side, since everyone is in a position to think
that this is precisely how he thinks and that Strauss would see already
fulfilled in him that which he has demanded only of the future. This
is part of the explanation of the extraordinary success of this book:
'as is here written so do we live and go our way rejoicing!' the scholar
cries to him, and is glad when he finds that others feel the same.
Whether he happens to differ from the Master on individual points ­
over DaIWin, for example, or capital punishment - is to him of litde
moment, since he is on the whole so certain of breathing his own air
and hearing the echo of his voice and his needs. The painfulness of
this unanimity for any true friend of German culture must not deter
him from acknowledging it to himself or from making the fact
public.
We all know how our age is typified by its pursuit of science; we
know it because it is part of our life: and that precisely is the reason
almost no one asks himself what the consequences of such an
involvement with the sciences could be for culture, even supposing
that the will and the capacity to promote culture were everywhere to
hand. For the nature of scientific man (quite apart from the form he
assumes at present) contains a real paradox: he behaves like the
proudest idler of fortune, as though existence were not a dreadful
and questionable thing but a firm possession guaranteed to last for
ever. He seems to be permitted to squander his life on questions
whose answer could at bottom be of consequence only to someone
assured of an eternity. The heir of but a few hours, he is ringed
around with frightful abysses, and every step he takes ought to make
him ask: Whither? Whence? To what end? But his soul is warmed
with the task of counting the stamens of a flower or breaking up the
stones of the pathway, and all the interest,j oy, strength and desire he
possesses is absorbed in this work. Now, this paradox, the scientific
man, has in recent years got into a frantic hurry in Germany, as
though science were a factory and every minute's slacking incurred
punishment. Nowadays he works as hard as the fourth estate, the
slaves; his study is no longer an occupation but a necessity, he looks
neither to right nor left and goes through all the business of life, and
its more questionable aspects, with the half-consciousness or the
repellent need for entertainment characteristic of the exhausted
worker.
Now this is his attitude towards culture too. He behaves as though life
were to him only otium but sine dignitate:'ç and even in his dreams he
does not throw off his yoke, like a slave who even when freed still
dreams of servitude and beatings. Our scholars are hardly to be dis­
tinguished - and then not to their advantage - from farmers who
want to increase the tiny property they have inherited and are
assiduously employed all day and far into the night in tilling the
field, leading the plough and encouraging the oxen. Now, Pascal
believes quite generally that men pursue their business and their
sciences so eagerly only so as to elude the most important questions
which would press upon them in a state of solitude or if they were
truly idle, that is to say precisely those questions as to Whither,
Whence and Why. Amazingly, the most obvious question fails to
occur to our scholars: what is their work, their hurry, their painful
frenzy supposed to be for? To earn bread or acquire positions of
honour, perhaps? Not at all. Yet you exert yourselves like those in
need of food, indeed you tear it from the table of science as greedily
and as utterly un selectively as though yO}:l were on the point of star­
vation. But if you, as men of science, treat science in the way a worker
treats the tasks that are to furnish his means oflife, what will become
of a culture condemned to await the hour of its birth and redemp­
tion in the midst of such excitement and breathless confusion? No
one has time for it - and yet what is science for at all if it has no time
for culture? At least reply to this question: what is the Whence,
Whither, To what end of science ifit is not to lead to culture? To leǭd
to barbarism, perhaps? That our learned class has already gone
frighteningly far in this direction is evident when we think that such
superficial books as Strauss's are sufficient to meet the demands of
their present cultural level. For it is precisely in such books that we
find that repellent need for entertainment and that casual, only-half­
listening accommodation with philosophy and culture and with the
serious things oflife in general. One is reminded of the social world
of the learned classes, where too, when the shop talk is exhausted,
there is evidence only of weariness, of a desire for diversion at any
price, of a tattered memory and incoherent personal experience.
When we hear Strauss speak of the problems of life - whether it be
the problem of marriage or of war or of capital punishment - we are
appalled at his lack of real experience, of any native insight into the
nature of man: all his judgments are so uniformly bookish, indeed at
"'otium sine dignitate: idleness without dignity
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
bottom merely of the sort found in the newspapers; literary remi­
niscences take the place of genuine ideas and insights, an affected
moderation and knowingness is supposed to compensate us for the
lack of real wisdom and maturity of thought. How exactly this cor­
responds to the spirit which informs the noisily advertised high seats
oflearning in the cities of Germany! How congenial this spirit must
find the spirit of Strauss: for it is in precisely those places that culture
is most completely lacking, it is precisely there that the germination
of a new culture is totally thwarted; noisy preparation for the sciences
there pursued goes with a herdlike stampede for the disciplines most
in favour at the cost of deserting those of most consequence. With
what kind oflantern would one have to search here for men capable
of inward contemplation and an undivided devotion to the genius
and possessing the strength and courage to conjure up demons
which have deserted our age! Viewed externally, these places display
all the pomp of culture, with their imposing apparatus they re­
semble an arsenal choked with cannon and other weapons of war:
we behold such preparations and industrious activity as though
Heaven itself were to be stormed and truth fetched up out of the
deepest well, and yet in warfare it is often the biggest pieces of
apparatus that are worst deployed. Genuine culture likewise avoids
these places as it conducts its campaigns, feeling instinctively that it
has nothing to hope for and much to fear in them. For the only form
of culture with which the inflamed eye and the blunted brain of the
learned working class want to occupy themselves is precisely that
philistine culture whose gospel has been proclaimed by Strauss.
If we consider for a moment the principal grounds of that con­
geniality which links the learned working class and philistine culture
we shall also discover the path that leads us to our final main theme:
consideration of Strauss as a writer recognized as a classic.
In the first place, this culture wears an expression of complacency
and will have nothing essential changed in the present condition of
German education; it is above all seriously convinced of the
superiority of all German educational institutions, especially the
grammar schools and universities, never ceases to recommend them
to foreigners as models, and does not doubt for a moment that they
have made the German people into the most educated and judicious
nation in the world. Philistine culture believes in itself and therefore
in the means and methods available to it. In the second place,
however, it lays the final arbitration as to all questions' of taste and
culture in the hands of the scholar and regards itself as an ever-
3 7
growing compendium of learned opinions on art, literature and
philosophy; it is concerned to constrain the scholar to express his
opinions and then to administer them to the German people,
admixed, diluted or systematized, as a medicinal draught. Whatever
may develop outside this circle is listened to with doubt and inatten­
tively, or not listened to at all, until at length a single voice, no matter
whose it may be so long as it bears the firm stamp of the scholarly
species, is heard from within those sacred halls where the traditional
infallibility in matters of taste is supposed to dwell: and from then on
public opinion possesses one opinion more and repeats this single
voice with a hundredfold echo. I n  reality, however, this supposed
aesthetic infallibility is very questionable, so questionable indeed
that one may assume that a scholar in fact lacks taste, ideas and
aesthetic judgment until he has demonstrated the opposite. And
only a few will be able to do so. For, after the panting and harassment
of the daily race which the world of the sciences is today, how many
of them will be able to maintain that courageous and steady glance
that characterizes the champion of cttlture even if they ever
possessed it - that glance which condemns this daily race itself as a
source of barbarism? That is why these few must, moreover, live in a
state of opposition: what can they achieve against the uniform belief
of countless thousands who have one and all made of public opinion
their patron saint and who sustain and support one another in this
belief? Of what good is it for an individual to declare himself against
Strauss when the many have decided in his favour and the masses
they lead have learned to thirst for repeated draughts of the Master's
philistine sleeping-potion?
If we have herewith assumed without funher ado that the Straussian
confessional book has scored a victory with public opinion and has
been welcomed as a victor, its author may perhaps draw our atten­
tion to the fact that the diverse judgments on his book in the public
prints are by no means unanimous and certainly not uniformly
favourable, and that he himself has had to protest in a postscript
against the sometimes extremely hostile tone and impudent and
challenging manner of some of these newspaper warriors. How can
there be one public opinion about my book, he will expostulate,
when every journalist regards me as fair game, an outlaw to be mis­
handled at will! This contradiction is easily resolved as soon as we
distinguish between two aspects of the Strauss ian book, the theo­
logical and the literary: it is only in the latter aspect that the book
impinges on German culture. Through its theological colouring it
David Strauss the confessor and the writer
stands. outside our German culture and awakens the antipathy of the
various theological parties, indeed of every individual German
insofar as he is a theological sectarian by nature and invents his own
strange private theology so as to be able to dissent froL every other.
But just hear all these theological sectarians as soon as Strauss is
spoken of as a writer; at once the theological dissonances die away
and we hear in the purest unison as though from the mouth of one
community: nonetheless he is a classic writer! Now everyone, even the
most sullenly orthodox, flatters Strauss to his face as a writer, though
it may be no more than a word in commendation of his almost
Lessing-like dialectics or the freedom, beauty and validity of his
aesthetic views. As a book, it seems, the Straussian production cor­
responds exacdy to the ideal of a book. His theological opponents,
though they spoke loudest, are in this case only a small fragment of
the great public: and even in relation to them Strauss is right when he
says: 'Compared with my thousands of readers, my couple of dozen
detractors are a vanishing minority, and it will be hard for them to
prove that they are faithful interpreters of the former. If, in such a
matter as this is, those who disagree have spoken up, while those
who agree have contented themselves with silent approval, that lies
in the nature of the casM.' Apart from the scandal which Strauss may
here and there have provoked among the theological confessions, as
to Strauss the writer there thus reigns unanimity even among his
fanatical opponents to whom his voice is like the voice of the beast
from the abyss. And the treatment Strauss has received at the hands
of the literary day-labourers of the theological parties therefore proves
nothing against our proposition that in this book philistine culture
.has celebrated a triumph.
It must be admitted that the educated philistine is on average a
degree less candid than Strauss, or at least is more reserved when he
speaks publicly: but candour in another is therefore all the more
edifying for him; at home and among his own kind he loudly
applauds it, and it is only in writing that he declines to confess how
much all that Strauss says is after his own heart. For, as we already
know, our culture philistine is somewhat cowardly, even when he is
strongly moved: and it is precisely the fact that Strauss is a degree less
cowardly that makes him a leader, while on the other hand there are
very definite limits to his courage. If he were to overstep these limits,
as Schopenhauer for instance does with almost every sentence, he
would no longer lead on the philistines as their chieftain but would
be deserted as precipitately as he is now followed. If anyone thought
to call this moderation and mediocritas in courage, which if not wise is
at any rate prudent, an Aristotelean virtue he would be in error: for
this species of courage is the mean, not between two faults, but be­
tween a fault and a virtue
and it is within this mean between virtue
and fault that all the qualities of the philistine lie.
'But nonetheless he is a classic writer!' We shall now see.
It might perhaps be in order to go on to speak of Strauss the stylist
and artist in language, but let us first of all consider whether as a
writer he is capable of constructing his house, whether he really
understands the architecture of a book. This will determine whether
he is a genuine, thoughtful and practised maker of books; and if we
have to answer in the negative, his fame can always take refuge in his
claim to be a 'classic writer of prose'. The latter capacity without the
former would, to .be sure, not suffice to raise him to the rank of a
classic author, but at best to that of the clǭsic improvisers or virtuosi
of style who, with all their skill in expression, reveal in the actual
erection of the building the clumsy hand and ignorant eye of the
bungler. We shall therefore ask whether Strauss possesses the artistic
power to construct a whole, totum ponere. *
As a rule the first written draft suffices to show whether the author
has envisaged his work as a whole and found the general teII!po and
correct proportions appropriate to what he has envisaged. If this
most vital of tasks has been achieved and the building itself erected
. with proper scale and balance, there nonetheless remains a great
deal still to do: how many minor errors must be corrected, how
many holes stopped, here and there a provisional partition or a false
floor must be replaced, dust and rubble lie everywhere, and
wherever you look you can see signs of the labour that has been
going on; the house as a whole is still uninhabitable and uncomfort­
able: all the walls are bare and the wind whistles through the open
windows. Whether Strauss has done the great and wearisome work
now needed will not concern us very long when we ask ifhe has pro­
duced the building itself in fair proportions and visualized it as a
whole. The opposite of this, to put a book together out of bits and
pieces, is well known to be the way of scholars. They trust that these
bits and pieces will cohere of themselves and thereby confuse logical
*totum ponere: to construct a whole (repeating previous phrase)
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
cohesion with artistic. In any event, the relation between the four
main questions which designate the divisions of Strauss's book is not
logical: 'Are we still Christians? Do we still possess religion? How do
we conceive the world? How do we order our life?', and their re­
lation is not logical because the third question has nothingto do with
the second, the fourth nothing to do with the third, and all three
have nothing to do with the first. The natural scientist, for example,
who poses the third question, demonstrates the immaculateness of
his sense for truth precisely in that he passes by the second in silence;
and that the themes of the fourth section - marriage, society, capital
punishment
would only be confused and darkened by the
introduction of Darwinist theories from the third section seems to be
grasped by Strauss himself, for he in fact pays no further regard to
these theories. But the question 'are we still Christians?' at once
prejudices freedom of philosophical reflection and gives it an
unpleasant theological colouring; in addition to which he has quite
forgotten that even today the greater part of mankind is still
Buddhist and not Christian. Why should we without more ado think
at the words 'old faith' of Christianity alone! If Strauss herewith
reveals that he has never ceased to be a Christian theologian and has
thus never learned to become a philosopher, he further surprises us
by his inability to distinguish between faith and knowledge and by
continually naming his so-called 'new faith' and the contemporary
sciences in the same breath. Or should we regard the new faith as
only an ironical accommodation to linguistic usage? It almost seems
so when we see that here and there he innocently lets new faith and
contemporary science deputize for one another, for example on
page 1 1, where he asks on which side, that of the old faith or that of
contemporary science, 'there are to be found more of the obscurities
and inadequacies unavoidable in human affairs'. According to his
introduction, moreover, he intends to present the evidence upon
which the modern philosophy of life depends: all this evidence he
borrows from science and here too he adopts wholly the posture of a
man of knowledge, not that of a believer.
At bottom, then, the new religion is not a new faith but precisely
on a par with modern science and thus not religion at all. If Strauss
nevertheless asserts that he does have a religion, the reasons for it lie
outside the domain of contemporary science. Only a minute portion
of Strauss's book, amounting to no more than a few scattered pages,
treats of that which Strauss could have a right to call a faith: namely
that feeling for the cosmos for which he demands the same piety as
4 1
III
II '
the believer of the old stamp feels towards his God. In these pages at
least the scientific spirit is certainly not in evidence: but we could
wish for a little more strength and naturalness of faith! For what is so
extremely striking is the artificiality of the procedures our author has
to adopt in order to convince himself he still possesses a faith and a
religion at all: as we have seen, he has to resort to jabbing -and
cudgelling. It creeps weakly along, this stimulated faith: we freeze at
the sight of it.
Strauss promises in his introduction to test whether this new faith
is capable of doing for the new believer what the old faith does for
the believer of the old stamp, but in the end he himself comes to
think he has promised too much. For when he deals with the subject
he does so in a quite offhand, indeed almost embarrassed manner,
in a couple of pages (pp. 366f.), even resorting to the desperate ploy:
'whoever cannot help himself here is beyond help and is not yet ripe
for our point of view' (p. 366). Consider with what weight of con­
viction the Stoic of antiquity believed in the cosmos and in the
rationality of the cosmos, and contrɳst with it even the claim to
originality which Strauss makes for his faith! But, as we have said,
whether it is new or old, original or imitated, would be a matter of
indifference if only it exhibited naturalness, health and strength.
Strauss himself leaves this distilled emergency faith in the lurch
whenever the claims of knowledge constrain him to do so and in
order to present his newly acquired scientific perceptionɴ to his 'we'
with a quieter conscience. The timidity with which he speaks of his
faith is matched by his loud orotundity whenever he cites the
greatest benefactor of most recent mankind, Darwin: here he
demands faith, not merely in the new Messiah, but in himself, the
new apostle, too; for example when, dealing with the most intricate
theme of natural science, he pronounces with a truly antique pride:
'I shall be told I am speaking of things I do not understand. Good;
but others will come who understand them and who have also
understood me.' From this it seems almost as though the celebrated
'we' are to be obligated to a faith, not only in the cosmos, but in
Strauss the natural scientist too; in that case all we would ask is that
the latter faith should not require for its realization such cruel and
painful procedures as the former did. Or can it be that in this
instance the 'religious reaction' which is the mark of the 'new faith'
will be produced in the believer by the jabbing and cudgelling, not
of the believer himself, but of the object of the belief? If so, how we
should profit from the religiosity of these 'we'!
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
For otheIWise it is almost to be feared that modern men will be
able to get along without bothering overmuch with the ingredients
of Strauss's religious faith, just as they have in fact hitherto got along
without the principle of the rationality of the cosmos. Modern
natural science and study of history have nothing whatever to do
with the Straussian faith in the cosmos, and that the modern philis­
tine does not need it either is shown by the description of his life
which Strauss himself gives in the section 'How do we order our
life?' He is therefore right to doubt whether the 'carriage' to which
his 'valued readers have had to entrust themselves meets every
requirement'. It certainly does not meet them: for modern man
travels a lot faster if he is not sitting in this Straussian carriage - or
more correctly: he was travelling a lot faster long before this Straussian
carriage existed. So ifit be true that the celebrated 'minority that can­
not be ignored' of which and in whose name Strauss speaks really
'sets great store by consistency', then they must be just as dissatisfied
with Strauss the carriage-builder as we are with Strauss the
logician.
But let us forget about the logician: perhaps the book really is well
formed artistically, and conforms to the laws of beauty even ifit does
not possess a well-thought-out logical plan. And it is only now, after
determining that he has not borne himself as a scientific, orderly
minded and systematizing scholar, that we arrive at the question
whether Strauss is a good writer.
Perhaps he conceived it as his task, not so much to frighten people
away from the 'old faith', as to lure them to the new philosophy of
life by depicting it in cheerful and lively colours. If he thought of
scholars and the educated as his first readers, he must have realized
from his own experience that, while they can be laid low with the
heavy artillery of scientific proof, they can never by this means be
brought to surrender, though they fall prey all the more readily to
lightly clad arts of seductions. 'Lightly clad', and that 'intentionally',
is however what Strauss himself calls his book; his public panegyrists
also find it and describe it as 'lightly clad', as for example this one
does in the following terms: 'The discourse moves fOIWard in a
pleasing rhythm and handles the art of demonstration with playful
ease when it is engaged critically against what is old, as it does no less
when it seductively prepares and presents to both undemanding and
experienced palates the new things it brings. The arrangement of
such manifold and dissimilar material, where everything is to be
touched on but nothing pursued at length, is well thought out; the
transitions from one subject to another are especialiy skilful, and
even more admirable, perhaps, is the dexterity with which uncom­
fortable things are pushed aside or buried in silence.' The senses of
such panegyrists are, as is apparent here too, alert not so much to
what an author can do as to what he wants to do. What Strauss wants
to do, however, is betrayed most clearly in his emphatic arid not
wholly innocent recommendation of a Voltairean gracefulness in the
service of which he could have learned those 'lightly clad' arts of
which his panegyrist speaks - supposing, that is, that virtue can be
taught and a pedant can ever become a dancer.
Who cannot harbour reservations when for example he reads
these words of Strauss's on Voltaire (p. 2 1 9): 'as a philosopher
Voltaire is not original, it is true, but in the main an elaborator of
English researches: yet he proves to be altogether a master of his
material, which with incomparable dexterity he illuminates from all
sides and thereby, without being strictly methodical, satisfies the
demands of thoroughness'. All the negative traits are in keeping: no
one will maintain that as a philosopher itrauss is original or strictly
methodical; the question is whether we will also acknowledge that he
is a 'master of his material' or concede to him 'incomparable dex­
terity'. The confession that the work is 'intentionally lightly clad'
allows us to guess that incomparable dexterity was at any rate
intended.
Not to build a temple or a dwelling, but to set down a ɵummer­
house surrounded with horticulture - that was our architect's
dream. It almost seems, indeed, that even that mysterious feeling for
the cosmos was intended mainly as a means of aesthetic effect, like a
view of an irrational element, the sea for instance, from within an
elegant and rational terrace. The walk through the first section - that
is to say, through the theological catacombs with their obscurity and
their convoluted and baroque ornamentation - was again only an
aesthetic means of emphasizing by contrast the purity, brightness
and rationality of the section entitled 'What is our conception of the
world?': for immediately after that walk in the gloom and glimpse of
distant irrational windings, we enter a hall with a fanlight; it receives
us with cheerful sobriety, there are celestial charts and mathematical
figures on the walls and it is filled with scientific apparatus and cup­
boards lined with skeletons, stuffed monkeys and anatomical
specimens. But we do not wholly recover our good humour until we
pass through this hall and enter the full domestic ease and comfort
of the occupants of our summer-house; we discover them with their
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
women and children engaged with their newspapers and common­
place chatter about politics, we listen for a time as they discuss
marriage and universal suffrage, capital punishment and workers'
strikes, and it seems to us impossible that the rosary of public
opinion could be told more quickly. Finally we are also to be con­
vinced of the classical taste of those who dwell here: a brief visit to the
library and the music-room discloses, as expected, that the best
books lie on the shelves and the most celebrated pieces of music on
the music-stands; they even play us something, and if it was sup­
posed to be Haydn's music at least Haydn was not to blame if it
sounded like Riehl's music for the home. In the meantime, the master
of the house has had occasion to state that he is in entire agreement
with Lessing, also with Goethe, though excluding the second part of
Faust. Finally the summer-house owner commends himself, and
expresses the view that those he disagrees with are beyond help and
not yet ripe for his point of view; whereupon he offers us his carriage,
with the polite reservation that he cannot guarantee it will answer to
all our requirements; the stones on his carriageways are, moreover,
newly scattered and we might be much buffeted about. Our
Epicurean garden god then takes his leave of us with the incom­
parable dexterity he had recognized and commended in Voltaire.
Who could now doubt this incomparable dexterity? We recognize
the master of his material, the lightly clad horticulturalist is un­
masked; and still we hear the voice of the classic author: 'As a writer I
refuse to be a philistine, I refuse! I refuse! I want to be Voltaire, the
German Voltaire! and best of all the French Lessing too!'
We have betrayed a secret: our Master does not always know who
he would prefer to be, Voltaire or Lessing, but wants at no price to be
a philistine; if possible, he would like to be both, Lessing and Voltaire
- that it might be fulfilled which was written: 'he had no character
whatever: whenever he wanted a character he always had to
assume one'.
If we have understood Strauss the confessor correctly, he himself is a
true philistine with a narrow, dried-up soul and with sober and
scholarly requirements: and yet no one would be angrier at being
called a philistine than David Strauss the writer. Hewould approve if
one called him headstrong, rash, malicious, foolhardy; but he would
be most pleased of all to be compared with Lessing or Voltaire, since
they were certainly not philistines. In his search to procure this
pleasure he is often undecided whether he ought to imitate the bold
dialectical impetuosity of Lessing or whether it might not be better
to comport himself as a satyr-like free-spirited elder in the manner of
Voltaire. Whenever he sits down to write he always composes his fea­
tures as though he were about to have his portrait painted: some­
times he makes his face resemble Lessing's, sometimes Voltaire's.
When we read his praise of the Voltairean style (p. 2 1 7), he seems to
be expressly admonishing the present for not having long since
recognized what it possesses in the modern Voltaire: 'the merits of
his style', Strauss says, 'are everywhere the same: simple naturalness,
transparent clarity, lively flexibility, pleasing charm. Warmth and
emphasis are not wanting where they are needed; hatred of pom­
posity and affectation came from Voltaire's innermost nature; just as
when, on the other hand, passion and impetuosity lowered the tone
of his discourse, the fault lay not with the stylist but with the human
being in him.' To judge from this, Strauss is well aware of the
significance of simplicity of style: it has always been the mark of genius,
which also possesses the privilege of expressing itself simply,
naturally and with naivety. It therefore betrays no common am­
bition when an author chooses a simple style: for, although many
will see what such an author would like to be taken for, there are
nonetheless many who are so obliging as to take him for it. But if an
author possesses genius he betrays it in more than siǮplicity and
precision of expression: his abundant power plays with his material
even when it is difficult and dangerous. Stiff and timid steps will get
no one along unfamiliar paths littered with a thousand abysses: the
genius, however, runs nimbly along such paths with daring or
elegant strides and disdains cautiously to measure his steps.
That the problems Strauss passes in review are serious and dreadful
ones, and have been treated as such by the wise of every age, is
known to Strauss himself, and yet he calls his book lightly clad. Of all
the dread and gloomy seriousness of reflection into which one is
plunged perforce when faced with the questions of the value of exist­
ence and the duties of man there is not the slightest suspicion as our
gifted Master goes fluttering past us, 'lightly clad and intentionally
so'
more lightly clad, indeed, than is his Rousseau, who, he
informs us, denuded his lower half and draped his upper, while
Goethe, he says, draped his lower half and denuded his upper.
Wholly naive geniuses, it seems, do not drape themselves at all, so
perhaps the expression 'lightly clad' is only a euphemism for naked.
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
Of the goddess truth, the few who have seen her affirm that she has
been naked: and perhaps in the eyes of those who have not seen her
but accept the word of those few who have, nakedness or lightly­
cladness is in itself a proof of truth, even if only cin::umstantial proof.
Merely to suspect that this is the case works to the advantage of an
author's ambition: someone sees something naked - 'suppose it
should be the truth!' he says to himself, and assumes a more solemn
expression than the one he usually wears. But an author has already
attained much if he has constrained his reader to regard him more
solemnly than he does some other, more heavily clad author. It is
the way to one day becoming a 'classic': and Strauss himself tells us
that he has 'been accorded the unsought honour of being regarded
as a kind of classic prose-writer', that he has thus arrived at the goal
of his journey. Strauss the genius runs about the streets as a 'classic'
disguised as a lightly clad goddess, and Strauss the philistine is, to
employ an original locution of this genius, at all costs to be 'decreed
out of fashion' or 'thrown out never to return' .
Alas, the philistine does return, again and again, despite all such
decrees and throwings-out! Alas, the face, twisted into a semblance
of Voltaire or Lessing, from time to time snaps back into its old, honest,
original shape! Alas, the mask of genius all too often falls off, and the
Master never wears a more vexed expression, his gestures are never
stiffer, than when he has just attempted to imitate the stride of genius
and to make his eyes flash with the fire of genius. Ours is a cold
clime, and ir is precisely because he goes around so lightly clad that
he runs the risk of catching cold more often and more gravely than
others; that the others then notice all this may be acutely painful, but
ifhe is ever to be cured he will have to submit to the following public
diagnosis: There was once a Strauss, a brave, rigorous and austerely
clad scholar-, whom we found as congenial as anyone who in Germany
serves truth seriously and with vigour and knows how to stay within
his own limitations; he who is now celebrated by public opinion as
David Strauss has become someone else: it may be the fault of the
theologians that he has become this someone else; enough, we find
the game he now plays with the mask of genius as repellent or ludi­
crous as we found his former seriousness evocative of seriousness
and sympathy. When he now informs us: 'it would also be an act of
ingratitude towards my genius if I did not rejoice that, beside the gift
of unsparing destructive criticism, I have also been granted the inno­
cent pleasure of artistic creativity', it may surprise him to know that
despite this self-testimonial there are people who maintain the
opposite: firstly, that he has never possessed thǯ gift of artistic
creativity, and then that the pleasure he calls 'innocent' is anything
but innocent, inasmuch as it gradually undermined a fundamentally
vigorous and deep-seated scholarly and critical nature - that is to say,
the genius Strauss actually did possess - and in the end destroyed it. In an
access of unrestrained candour, Strauss himself concedes that.he has
always 'had his own Merck within him, who cried to him: you must
no longer produce such trash, others can do that!' This was the voice
of the genuine Straussian genius: and it even tells him how much or
how little his latest, innocently lightly clad testament of the modern
philistine is worth. Others can do that too! And many could do it better!
And those who could do it best, more gifted and richer spirits than
Strauss, would, when they had done it, never have produced any­
thing other than - trash.
I believe I have made it clear how I regard Strauss the writer: as an
actor who plays at being a genius and classic. Lichtenberg once said:
'The simple style is to be recommended first of all because no honest
man subjects what he has to say to artifiCial elaboration', but that cer­
tainly does not mean that the simple manner is a proof of authorial
integrity. I could wish that Strauss the writer were more honest, for
then he would write better and be less celebrated. Or - if he
absolutely must be an actor - I could wish he were a good actor and
knew better how to imitate the style of naive genius and the classic.
For it remains to be said that Strauss is in fact a bad actor and utterly
worthless as a stylist.
1 1
The reproach that one is not a good writer is softened, to be sure, by
the fact that in Germany it is very difficult to become even a
mediocre and tolerable writer, and quite astonishingly improbable
that one will become a good one. A natural basis is lacking, an artistic
evaluation, treatment and cultivation of oral speech. As the ex­
pressions 'salon conversation', 'sermon', 'parliamentary oratory',
indicate, public speech has in Germany not yet attained to a national
style or even to the desire for a style; language has not yet emerged
from the stage of naive experimentation; so that there is no unified
norm by which the writer may be guided and he thus has a certain
right to handle language on his own responsibility: and this must
result in that limitless dilapidation of the German language which
constitutes the 'language of the present' and which has been des-
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
cribed most forcefully by Schopenhauer. 'If this goes on', he once
said, 'in the year 1 900 the German classics will no longer be com­
prehensible, since the only language understood will be the shabby
jargon of our noble "present"
the basic character of which is
impotence.' Already, indeed, German linguistic arbiters and gram­
marians writing in the most recent journals give the impression that
our classics can no longer be valid to us as stylistic models because
they employ a large number of words, locutions and syntactical
figures which we have lost: for which reason it might seem appro­
priate to collect together the masterpieces of our present literary
celebrities for the purpose of imitating their vocabulary and
phraseology, as has in fact been done by Sander in his concise pocket
dictionary of infamous language. Here the repellent stylistic mon­
ster Gutzkow appears as a classic: and it seems that we have in
general to accustom ourselves to a whole new and surprising host of
'classics', among whom the first, or one of the first, is David Strauss ­
whom we cannot describe in any way other than we have already
described him: as a worthless stylist.
Now, it is extremely characteristic of the pseudo-culture of the
cultural philistine that he should even appropriate the concept of the
classic and the model writer
he who exhibits his strength only in
warding off a real, artistically vigorous cultural style and through
steadfastness in warding off arrives at a homogeneity of expression
which almost resembles a unity of style. How is it possible that, given
the limitless experimentation with language everyone is permitted
to indulge in, certain individual authors nonetheless discover a
universally agreeable tone of voice? What is it really that is here so
universally agreeable? Above all a negative quality: the absence of
anything offensive - but anything truly productive is offensive. - For the
greater part of what the German of today reads undoubtedly com­
prises the newspapers and the magazines that go with them: the
language here employed, a ceaseless drip of the same locutions and
the same words, imprints itself on his ear, and since he usually reads
this literature at times when his wearied mind is in any case little
capable of resistance, his ear for language gradually comes to feel at
home in this everyday German and is pained when it notices its
absence. The manufacturers of these newspapers, however, are, as
would be expected from their whole way of life, the most accus­
tomed to the slime of this newspaper language: they have in the strictest
sense of the word lost all taste, and the most their tongue can still
savour with any kind of pleasure is the totally corrupt and ca-
pricious. This explains the tutti unisono which, notwithstanding the
general debility and sickness, greets every newly invented solecism:
such impudent corruptions are an act of revenge on the language for
the unbelievable boredom it inflicts upon its day-labourers. I recall
having read an appeal 'to the German people' by Berthold Auerbach
in which every locution was an un-German distortion and falsifi­
cation of the language, and which as·a whole resembled a soulless
mosaic of words stuck together with an international syntax; not to
speak of the shamelessly slovenly German with which Eduard Devrient
celebrated the memory of Mendelssohn. Thus the solecism - this is
the remarkable thing- is felt by our philistines, not as objectionable,
but as a stimulating refreshment in the arid and treeless desert of
everyday German. But the truly productive he does find objectionable.
The most modern model author is not merely forgiven his distorted,
extravagant or threadbare syntax and his ludicrous neologisms, they
are reckoned a merit in him which gives his work piquancy: but woe
to the stylist with character who avoids these everyday locutions as
seriously and persistently as he does 'tie monsters of present-day
scribbling hatched out last night', as Schopenhauer puts it. When
platitudes, commonplaces and hackneyed and feeble language are
the rule, and badness and corruption received as stimulating excep­
tions, then the forceful, uncommon and beautiful falls into dis­
favour: so that in Germany there is constantly being repeated the
story of the traveller who came to the land of the hunchbacks and
was shamefully insulted by its inhabitants because of his supposedly
defective physique, until at last a priest had mercy on him and said to
the people: 'Rather pity this poor stranger and sacrifice to the gods in
gratitude for having adorned you with this stately hump.'
If anyone should compose a grammar of current everyday German
and trace the rules which, as an unwritten and unspoken yet com­
pelling imperative, govern everyone's writing-desk, he would
encounter some strange notions of style and rhetoric, taken perhaps
from recollections of school and enforced Latin exercises, perhaps
from reading French writers at whose astonishing crudeness any
properly educated Frenchman would have a right to scoff. It seems
that, though reputed thorough, the Germans have never yet reflected
on these strange notions, under the rule of which more or less every
German lives and writes.
Then we have the demand that from time to time a simile or a
metaphor should appear, and that the metaphor must be a new one:
but to the poor writer's brain new and modern are the same thing,
David Strauss, the corifessor and the writer
and it now torments itself to draw metaphors from the railway, the
telegraph, the steam-engine, the stock exchange, and feels proud of
the fact that these similes must be new because they are modern. In
Strauss's confessional book we find ample tribute paid to the modem
metaphor: he dismisses us with a page-and-a-halflong simile drawn
from road improvement works, a few pages earlier he compares the
world to a machine with its wheels, pistons, hammers and 'soothing
oil'. - A meal which starts with champagne (p. 362). Kant as a hydro­
pathic establishment (p. 325). 'The Swiss constitution compares with
the English as a watermill compares with a steam-engine, a waltz or a
song with a fugue or a symphony' (p. 265). 'In the case of every
appeal, the correct succession of tribunals must be adhered to. The
intermediate tribunal between the individual and mankind, however,
is the nation' (p. 258). 'If we wish to discover whether life in fact exists
in an organism that seems to us dead, we usually test it by adminis­
tering a strong, often painful stimulus, a jab for instance' (p. 141).
'The religious domain in the human soul is like the domain of the
Redskin in America' (p. 1 38). 'To set down the sum total of all the
preceding in round numbers at the bottom of the bill' (p. 90). 'The
Darwinian theory is like a railway track that has just been marked out
. . .  where the banners flutter gaily in the wind' (p. 1 76). It is in this
way, namely the most modern way, that Strauss has complied with
the philistine demand that from time to time a new metaphor must
make an appearance.
Also very widespread is a further demand that didactic statements
must be composed in long sentences employing abstractions, while
those intended to persuade should preferably be in short little sen­
tences with contrasting forms of expression hopping one after the
other. Strauss provides on page 1 32 a model sentence of the didactic
and scholarly kind: inflated to truly Schleiermacherish proportions,
it creeps along at the pace of a tortoise: 'That at the earlier stages of
religion, instead of a single such Whence there appear many, instead
of one God there appears a multiplicity of gods, is, according to this
derivation of religion, due to the fact that the various natural forces
or conditions of life which arouse in man the feeling of absolute
dependence still act upon him in the beginning in all their multi­
fariousness, he has not yet become aware how in regard to his
absolute dependence upon them there is no distinction between
them, consequently the Whence of this dependence or the Being to
which in the last instance they are to be traced back can be only one.'
An example of the opposite kind of thing, of the short little sentences
5 1
and affected vivacity which have so excited some readers they can
now mention Strauss only in concert with Lessing, can be found on
page 8: 'I am well aware that what 1 propose to discuss in the following
pages is known just as well by countless other people and by some it
is known better. Some of them have already spoken out. Should 1
therefore keep silent? 1 do not believe so. For we all supplement one
another. If another knows many things better than I, perhaps 1 know
a few things better than he; and 1 have a viewpoint on many things
different from the viewpoint of others. So out with it, let me display
my colours, that it may be seen whether or not they are genuine.' To
be sure, Strauss's style usually maintains a mean between this free­
and-easy quick-march and the funereal crawl of the first example:
but between two vices there does not always dwell virtue; all too
often what dwells there is weakness, lameness and impotence. 1 was
very disappointed, in fact, when 1 looked through Strauss's book in
search of more subtle and wittier traits and expressions; since 1 had
found nothing praiseworthy in the confessor 1 actually established a
heading under which to list such passages,eso that 1 might at least be
able to say something in praise of Strauss the writer. 1 searched and
searched but could list nothing. On the other hand, a second list
with the heading 'Solecisms, confused similes, obscure abbrevi­
ations, tastelessness and affectation' became so full 1 can venture to
reproduce here only a modest selection of the examples
assembled. Perhaps it will reveal precisely what it is that evokes in the
contemporary German his belief that Strauss is a great stylist: for
here we find curiosities of expression which in the arid dust and
desert of the book as a whole offer if not pleasant at any rate painfully
stimulating surprises: on encountering such passages we notice, to
employ a Straussian metaphor, that at least we are not yet dead by
the way we react to these jabs. For the rest of the book displays a total
lack of anything whatever offensive, that is to say productive, such as
would now be reckoned a positive quality in the classic prose-writer.
Extreme sobriety and aridity, a truly starving sobriety, nowadays
awakens in the educated masses the unnatural feeling that precisely
these are the signs of flourishing health, so that here there apply the
words of the author of the Dialogus de Oratibus: 'illam ipsam quam iactant
sanitatem non firmitate sed ieiunio consequuntur' . * With instinctive
unanimity, they hate allfirmitas because it bears witness to a healthi­
ness quite different from theirs, and seek to throw suspicion on
*illam ipsam quam iactant sanitatem non firmitate sed ieiunio consequuntur: even their
health, which they parade, they obtain not through strength but through fasting
(Tacitus)
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
firmitas,. on conciseness, on fiery energy of movement, on abundant
and delicate play of the muscles. They have agreed together to invert
the nature and names of things and henceforth to speak of health
where we see weakness, of sickness and tension where we encounter
true health. That is how David Strauss comes to be accounted a
'classic'.
If only this sobriety were at least a stricdy logical sobriety: but sim­
plicity and rigour in thinking is precisely what these weaklings lack,
and in their hands language itself becomes a logical tangle. Just try
translating this Straussian style into Latin - which can be done even
with Kant, and with Schopenhauer is pleasurable and easy. The
reason Strauss's German is altogether unamenable to it is probably
not that his German is more German than Kant's or Schopenhauers,
but that his German is confused and illogical while theirs is
informed with grandeur and simplicity. He who knows the effort the
ancients expended on learning to speak and write, and how the
moderns make no such effort, feels, as Schopenhauer once said, a
real sense of relief when, having been compelled to wade through a
German book like this one, he turns to those other ancient yet ever
new languages: 'for with these', he says, 'I have before me a language
with fixed rules and a firmly established and faithfully observed
grammar and orthography and can devote myself wholly to the
thought expressed in it; while with German I am continually dis­
tracted by the impudence of the writer seeking to obtrude his own
grammatical and orthographical whims and eccentricities: a piece of
swaggering folly I find repellent. I t  is truly an agony to see a fair and
ancient language possessing a classical literature mishandled by
ignoramuses and asses.'
Thus Schopenhauer's holy wrath cries out to you, so you cannot
say you were not warned. But he who absolutely refuses to heed this
warning, and insists on continuing in his belief that Strauss is a
classic, should, as a final word of advice, be recommended to imitate
him. If you do try this, though, it will be at your peril: you will have to
pay for it, in your style and, eventually, in your head, that the dictum
of I ndian wisdom may be fulfilled in you too: 'To gnaw at the horn of
a cow is useless and shortens life: you grind down your teeth and yet
you get no nourishment.'
1 2
I n  conclusion we shall now place before our classic prose-writer the
promised collection of examples of his style; perhaps Schopenhauer
would give it the title: 'New documents of the shabby jargon of
today'; for, if it is any comfort to him, David Strauss may be com­
forted to be told that nowadays all the world writes as he does, and
some people write even worse than he, and that in the country of the
blind the one-eyed man is king. Indeed, we concede to him a great
deal when we concede to him one eye; we do so, however, because at
least Strauss does not write like the most infamous of all corrupters
of German, the Hegelians and their deformed offspring. At least he
wants to get back out of this swamp and he has partly succeeded,
though he is as yet very far from being on firm land; it is still notice­
able that in his youth he stuttered Hegelian: something in him
became dislocated at that time, some muscle got stretched; his ear
became dulled, like the ear of a boy brought up amid the beating of
drums, so that thereafter he became deaf to the subtle and mighty
laws of sound under whose rule every writer lives who has been strictly
trained to follow good models. He therewith lost as a stylist his best
possessions and, if he is not to slip back into the Hegelian mud, is
condemned to live out his life on the I»arren and perilous quicksands
of newspaper style. Nonetheless he has succeeded in becoming
famous for a couple of hours in our time, and perhaps there will be a
couple of hours more when it will be remembered that he was once
famous; but then night will come and he will be forgotten: and
already at this moment, as we inscribe his stylistic sins in the black
book, twilight begins to fall on his fame. For he who has sinned
against the German language has profaned the mystery of all that is
German: through all the confusion and changes of nations and cus­
toms, it alone has, as by a metaphysical magic, preserved itself and
therewith the German spirit. It alone also guarantees thefuture of
this spirit, provided it does not itself perish at the hands of the present.
'But Di meliora!* Away, pachyderms, away! This is the Gennan
language, in which men have spoken, in which great poets have sung
and great thinkers written. Keep your paws off!' -
[Nietzsche now gives some 70 examples of the kind of language in which Der
alte und neue Glau be is written and subjects them to a scathing commentary.
The faults exposed include grammatical errors of various kinds, offences against
good usage, jumbled metaphors, impossible imagery and meaninglessness; and
the critique substantiates the charge that Strauss has lost all feelingfor German
and any clear awareness of the meaning of the words he uses. To attempt to
translate Strauss's faulty sentences into English equivalents would be an enjoy-
"Di meliora !: 0 ye good gods!
David Strauss, the confessor and the writer
able but otherwise senseless exercise in ingenuity; and for the reader who cannot
read these sentences in the original German Nietz.sche's comments must lose
most of their relevence and force. The sensible course would therefore seem to be to
omit this passage. ]
Herewith I have completed my confession of faith. It is the con­
fession of an individual; and what can such an individual do against
all the world, even if his voice is audible everywhere! His judgment
would - to leave you with one last genuine feather from the 5traussian
plumage - be only 'of as much subjective truth as without any objective power
of proof':- is that not so, my dear friends? So continue to be of good
cheer! For the time being at least let it rest with your 'of as much . . .  as
without'. For the time being? That is to say, for as long as that for
which it is always time, and which the present time has more need of
than ever, continues to count as untimely - I mean: telling the
truth.
On the Uses and Disadvantages
of History for Life
Foreword
'In any case, I hate everything that merely instructs me without
augmenting or directly invigorating my activity.' These words are
from Goethe, and they may stand as a sincere ceterum censeo* at the
beginning of our meditation on the value of history. For its intention
is to show why instruction without invigoration, why knowledge not
attended by action, why history as a costly superfluity and luxury,
must, to use Goethe's word, be seriously hated by us - hated because
we still lack even the things we need and the superfluous is the
enemy of the necessary. We need history, certainly, but we need it for
reasons different from those for which the idler in the garden of
knowledge needs it, even though he may look nobly down on our
rough and charmless needs and requirements. We need it, that is to
say, for the sake of life and action, not so as to turn comfortably away
from life and action, let alone for the purpose of extenuating the self­
seeking life and the base and cowardly action. We want to serve history
only to the extent that history serves life: for it is possible to value the
study of history to such a degree that life becomes stunted and
degenerate - a phenomenon we are now forced to acknowledge,
painful though this may be, in the face of certain striking symptoms
of our age.
I have striven to depict a feeling by which I am constantly tor­
mented; I revenge myself upon it by handing it over to the public.
Perhaps this depiction will inspire someone or other to tell me that
he too knows this feeling but that I have not felt it in its pure and
elemental state and have certainly not expressed it with the
assurance that comes from mature experience. Someone, I say, may
perhaps do so: most people, however, will tell me that this feeling is
altogether perverse, unnatural, detestable and wholly imper­
missible, and that by feeling it I have shown myself unworthy of the
mighty historical movement which, as is well known, has been in
evidence among the Germans particularly for the past two gener­
ations. Whatever the case, however, that I should venture a descrip­
tion of my feeling will promote rather than injure general decorum,
ceterum censeo: but I'm of the opinion
'1
since it will offer to many the opportunity of paying compliments to
the said movement. And for myself I shall gain something that is
worth more to me even than decorum - that is, to be publicly
instructed and put right about the character of our own time.
This meditation too is untimely, because I am here attempting to
look afresh at something of which our time is rightly proud - its
cultivation of history
as being injurious to it, a defect and
deficiency in it; because I believe, indeed, that we are all suffering
from a consuming fever of history and ought at least to recognize
that we are suffering from it. But if Goethe was right to assert that
when we cultivate our virtues we at the same time cultivate our faults,
and if, as everyone knows, a hypertrophied virtue
such as the his­
torical sense of our age appears to be - can ruin a nation just as effec­
tively as a hypertrophied vice: then there can be no harm in
indulging me for this once. And it may partly exonerate me when I
give an assurance that the experiences which evoked those tormenting
feelings were mostly my own and that I have drawn on the experiences
of others only for purposes of comparis(JJl; and further, that it is only
to the extent that I am a pupil of earlier times, especially the
Hellenic, that though a child of the present time I was able to acquire
such untimely experiences. That much, however, I must concede to
myself on account of my profession as a classicist: for I do not know
what meaning classical studies could have for our time if they were
not untimely - that is to say, acting counter to our time and thereby
acting on our time and, let us hope, for the benefit of a time to
come.
Consider the cattle, grazing as they pass you by: they do not know
what is meant by yesterday or today, they leap about, eat, rest, digest,
leap about again, and so from morn till night and from day to day,
fettered to the moment and its pleasure or displeasure, and thus
neither melancholy nor bored. This is a hard sight for man to see;
for, though he thinks himself better than the animals because he is
human, he cannot help envying them their happiness - what they
have, a life neither bored nor painful, is precisely what he wants, yet
he cannot have it because he refuses to be like an animal. A human
being may well ask an animal: 'Why do you not speak to me of your
happiness but only stand and gaze at me?' The animal would like to
answer, and say: 'The reason is I always forget what I was going to
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
say' - but then he forgot this answer too, and stayed silent: so that the
human being was left wondering.
But he also wonders at himself, that he cannot learn to forget but
clings relentlessly to the past: however far and fast he may run, this
chain runs with him. And it is a matter for wonder: a moment, now
here and then gone, nothing before it came, again nothing after it
has gone, nonetheless returns as a ghost and disturbs the peace of a
later moment. A leafflutters from the scroll of time, floats away- and
suddenly floats back again and falls into the man's lap. Then the man
says 'I remember' and envies the animal, who at once forgets and for
whom every moment really dies, sinks back into night and fog and is
extinguished for ever. Thus the animal lives unhistorically: for it is
contained in the present, like a number without any awkward frac­
tion left over; it does not know how to dissimulate, it conceals nothing
and at every instant appears wholly as what it is; it can therefore
never be anything but honest. Man, on the other hand, braces him­
self against the great and ever greater pressure of what is past: it
pushes him down or bends him sideways, it encumbers his steps as a,
dark, invisible burden which he can sometimes appear to disown
and which in traffic with his fellow men he is only too glad to disown,
so as to excite their envy. That is why it affects him like a vision of
a lost paradise to see the herds grazing or, in closer proximity to
him, a child which, having as yet nothing of the past to shake off,
plays in blissful blindness between the hedges of past and future.
Yet its play must be disturbed; all too soon it will be called out of
its state of forgetfulness. Then it will learn to understand the
phrase 'it was': that password which gives conflict, suffering and
satiety access to man so as to remind him what his existence fun­
damentally is - an imperfect tense that can never become a per­
fect one. If death at last brings the desired forgetting, by that act it
at the same time extinguishes the present and all existence and
therewith sets the seal on the knowledge that existence is only an
uninterrupted has-been, a thing that lives by negating, consuming
and contradicting itself.
If happiness, if reaching out for new happiness, is in any sense
what fetters living creatures to life and makes them go on living, then
perhaps no philosopher is more justified than the Cynic: for the
happiness of the ariimal, as the perfect Cynic, is the living proof of
the rightness of Cynicism. The smallest happiness, if only it is present
uninterruptedly and makes happy, is incomparably more happiness
than the greatest happiness that comes only as an episode, as it were
a piece of waywardness or folly, in a continuum of joylessness, desire
6 1
and privation. In the case of the smallest or of the greatest happiness,
however, it is always the same thing that makes happiness happiness:
the ability to forget or, expressed in more scholarly fashion, the
capacity to feel unhistorically during its duration. He who cannot sink
down on the threshold of the moment. and forget all the past, who
cannot stand balanced like a goddess of victory without growing
dizzy and afraid, will never know what happiness is worse, he will
never do anything to make others happy. Imagine the extremest
possible example of a man who did not possess the power of forget­
ting at all and who was thus condemned to see everywhere a state of
becoming: such a man would no longer believe in his own being,
would no longer believe in himself, would see everything flowing
asunder in moving points and would lose himself in this stream of
becoming: like a true pupil of Heraclitus, he would in the end hardly
dare to raise his finger. Forgetting is essential to action of any kind,
just as not only light but darkness too is essential for the life of
everything organic. A man who wanted to feel historically through
and through would be like one forcibly deprived of sleep, or an
animal that had to live only by rumination and ever repeated
rumination. Thus: it is possible to live almost without memory, and
to live happily moreover, as the animal demonstrates; but it is
altogether impossible to live at all without forge.tting. Or, to express
my theme even more simply: there is a degree of sleeplessness, of rumi­
nation, of the historical sense, which is harmful and ultimately fatal to the living
thinÛ whether this living thing be a man or a people or a culture.
To determine this degree, and therewith the boundary at which
the past has to be forgotten if it is not to become the gravedigger of
the present, one would have to know exactly how great the plastic
power of a man, a people, a culture is: I mean by plastic power the
capacity to develop out of oneself in one's own way, to transform and
incorporate into oneself what is past and foreign, to heal wounds, to
replace what has been lost, to recreate broken moulds. There are
people who possess so little of this power that they can perish from a
single experience, from a single painful event, often and especially
from a single subtle piece of injustice, like a man bleeding to death
from a scratch; on the other hand, there are those who are so little
affected by the worst and most dreadful disasters, and even by their
own wicked acts, that they are able to feel tolerably well and be in
possession of a kind of clear conscience even in the midst of them or
at any rate very soon afterwards. The stronger the innermost roots of
a man's nature, the more readily will he be able to assimilate and
On the uses and disadvantages of history Jor life
appropriate the things of the past; and the most powerful and
tremendous nature would be characterized by the fact that it would
know no boundary at all at which the historical sense began to
overwhelm it; it would draw to itself and incorporate into itself all the
past, its own and that most foreign to it, and as it were transform it
into blood. That which such a nature cannot subdue it knows how to
forget; it no longer exists, the horizon is rounded and closed, and
there is nothing left to suggest there are people, passions, teachings,
goals lying beyond it. And this is a universal law: a living thing can be
healthy, strong and fruitful only when bounded by a horizon; if it is
incapable of drawing a horizon around itself, and at the same time
too self-centred to enclose its own view within that of another, it will
pine away slowly or hasten to its timely end. Cheerfulness, the good
conscience, the joyful deed, confidence in the future - all of them
depend, in the case of the individual as of a nation, on the existence
of a line dividing the bright and discernible from the unilluminable
and dark; on one's being just as able to forget at the right time as to
remember at the right time; on the possession of a powerful instinct
for sensing when it is necessary to feel historically and when unhis­
torically. This, precisely, is the proposition the reader is invited to
meditate upon: the unhistorical and the historical are necessary in equal
measure Jor the health of an individual, of a people and oJ a culture.
First of all, there is an observation that everyone must have made:
a man's historical sense and knowledge can be very limited, his
horizon as narrow as that of a dweller in the Alps, all his judgments
may involve injustice and he may falsely suppose that all his
experiences are original to him - yet in spite of this injustice and
error he will nonetheless stand there in superlative health and
vigour, a joy to all who see him; while close beside him a man far
more just and instructed than he sickens and collapses because the
lines of his horizon are always restlessly changing, because he can no
longer extricate himself from the delicate net of his judiciousness
and truth for a simple act of will and desire. On the other hand we
have observed the animal, which is quite unhistorical, and dwells
within a horizon reduced almost to a point, and yet lives in a certain
degree of happiness, or at least without boredom and dissimulation;
we shall thus have to account the capacity to feel to a certain degree
unhistorically as being more vital and more fundamental, inasmuch
as it constitutes the foundation upon which alone anything sound,
healthy and great, anything truly human, can grow. The unhistorical
is like an atmosphere within which alone life can germinate and with
the destruction of which it must vanish. It is true that only by imposing
limits on this unhistorical element by thinking, reflecting, com­
paring, distinguishing, drawing conclusions, only through the
appearance within that encompassing cloud of a vivid flash oflight­
thus only through the power of employing the past for the purposes
oflife and of again introducing into history that which has been done
and is gone - did man become man: but with an excess of history
man again ceases to exist, and without that envelope of the unhis­
torical he would never have begun or dared to begin. What deed
would man be capable of if he had not first entered into that
vaporous region of the unhistorical? Or, to desert this imagery and
illustrate by example: imagine a man seized by a vehement passion,
for a woman or for a great idea: how different the world has become
to him! Looking behind him he seems to himself as though blind,
listening around him he hears only a dull, meaningless noise;
whatever he does perceive, however, he perceives as he has never
perceived before - all is so palpable, close, highly coloured,
resounding, as though he apprehended if with all his senses at once.
All his valuations are altered and disvalued; there are so many things
he is no longer capable of evaluating at all because he can hardly feel
them any more: he asks himself why he was for so long the fool of the
phrases and opinions of others; he is amazed that his memory
revolves unwearyingly in a circle and yet is too weak and weary to
take even a single leap out of this circle. It is the condition in which
one is the least capable of being just; narrow-minded, ungrateful to
the past, blind to dangers, deaf to warnings, one is a little vortex of
life in a dead sea of darkness and oblivion: and yet this condition ­
unhistorical, anti-historical through and through
is the womb not
only of the unjust but of every just deed too; and no painter will paint
his picture, no general achieve his victory, no people attain its
freedom without having first desired and striven for it in an unhis­
torical condition such as that described. As he who acts is, in
Goethe's words, always without a conscience, so is he also always
without knowledge; he forgets most things so as to do one thing, he
is unjust towards what lies behind him, and he recognizes the rights
only of that which is now to come into being and no other rights
whatever. Thus he who acts loves his deed infinitely more than it
deserves to be loved: and the finest deeds take place in such a
superabundance oflove that, even if their worth were incalculable in
other respects, they must still be unworthy of this love.
If, in a sufficient number of cases, one could scent out and retro-
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
spectively breathe this unhistorical atmosphere within which every
great historical event has taken place, he might, as a percipient
being, raise himself to asuprahistoncal vantage point such as Niebuhr
once described as the possible outcome of historical reflection. 'His­
tory, grasped clearly and in detail', he says, 'is useful in one way at
least: it enables us to recognize how unaware even the greatest and
highest spirits of our human race have been of the chance nature of
the form assumed by the eyes through which they see and through
which they compel everyone to see - compel, that is, because the
intensity of their consciousness is exceptionally great. He who has
not grasped this quite definitely and in many instances will be sub­
jugated by the appearance of a powerful spirit who brings to a given
form the most impassioned commitment.' We may use the word
'suprahistorical' because the viewer from this vantage point could
no longer feel any temptation to go on living or to take part in his­
tory; he would have recognized the essential condition of all hap­
penings - this blindness and injustice in the soul of him who acts; he
would, indeed, be cured for ever of taking history too seriously, for
he would have learned from all men and all experiences, whether
among Greeks or Turks, from a single hour of the first or of the
nineteenth century, to answer his own question as to how or to what
end life is lived. If you ask your acquaintances if they would like to
relive the past ten or twenty years, you will easily discover which- of
them is prepared for this suprahistorical standpoint: they will all
answer No, to be sure, but they will have different reasons for
answering No. Some may perhaps be consoling themselves: 'but the
next twenty will be better'; they are those of whom David Hume
says mockingly:
And from the dregs of life hope to receive
What the first sprightly running could not give.
Let us call them historical men; looking to the past impels them
towards the future and fires their courage to go on living and their
hope that what they want will still happen, that happiness lies behind
the hill they are advancing towards. These historical men believe
that the meaning of existence will come more and more to light in
the course of its process, and they glance behind them only so that,
from the process so far, they can learn to understand the present and
to desire the future more vehemently; they have no idea that, despite
their preoccupation with history, they in fact think and act unhis­
tori cally, or that their occupation with history stands in the service,
not of pure knowledge, but of life.
But our question can also be answered differently.' Again with a
No - but with a No for a different reason: with the No of the supra­
historical man, who sees no salvation in the process and for whom,
rather, the world is complete and reaches its finality at each and
every moment. What could ten more years teach that the past ten
were unable to teach!
Whether the sense of this teaching is happiness or resignation or
virtue or atonement, suprahistorical men have never been able to
agree; but, in opposition to all historical modes of regarding the
past, they are unanimous in the proposition: the past and the present
are one, that is to say, with all their diversity identical in all that is
typical and, as the omnipresence ofimperishable types, a motionless
structure of a value that cannot alter and a significance that is always
the same. Just as the hundreds of different languages correspond to
the same typically unchanging needs of man, so that he who
understood these needs would be unable to learn anything new
from any of these languages, so the suprahistorical thinker beholds
the history of nations and of individualĈfrom within, clairvoyantly
divining the original meaning of the various hieroglyphics and
gradually even coming wearily to avoid the endless stream of new
signs: for how should the unending superfluity of events not reduce
him to satiety, over-satiety and finally to nausea! So that perhaps the
boldest of them is at last ready to say to his heart, with Giacomo
Leopardi:
Nothing lives that is wonhy
Thy agitation, and the earth deserves not a sigh.
Our being is pain and boredom and the world is din - nothing more.
Be calm.
But let us leave the suprahistorical men to their nausea and their
wisdom: today let us rejoice for once in our unwisdom and, as
believers in deeds and progress and as honourers of the process, give
ourselves a holiday. Our valuation of the historical may be only an
occidental prejudice: but let us at least make progress within this
prejudice and not stand still! Let us at least learn better how to
employ history for the purpose of life! Then we will gladly acknowl­
edge that the suprahistorical outlook possesses more wisdom than
we do, provided we can only be sure that we possess more life: for
then our unwisdom will at any rate have more future than their wis­
dom will. And in order to leave no doubt as to the meaning of this
antithesis of life and wisdom, I shall employ an ancient, tried-and­
tested procedure and straightway propound a number of theses.
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
A historical phenomenon, known clearly and completely and
resolved into a phenomenon of knowledge, is, for him who has per­
ceived it, dead: for he has recognized in it the delusion, the injustice,
the blind passion, and in general the whole earthly and darkening
horizon of this phenomenon, and has thereby also understood its
power in h istory. This power has now lost its hold over him insofar
as he is a man of knowledge: but perhaps irhas not done so insofar a.s
he is a man involved in life.
H istory become pure, sovereign science would be for mankind a
sort of conclusion of life and a settling of accounts with it. The study
of h istory is something salutary and fr.uitful for the future only as the
attendant of a mighty new current of life, of an evolving culture for
example, that is to say only when it is dominated and directed by a
higher force and does not itself dominate and direct.
Insofar as it stands in the service of life, history stands in the service
of an un historical power, and, thus subordinate, it can and should
never become a pure science such as, for instance; mathematics is.
The question of the degree to which life requires the service of his­
tory at all, however, is one of the supreme questions and concerns in
regard to the health of a man, a people or a culture. For when it
attains a certain degree of excess, life crumbles and degenerates, and
through this degeneration history itself finally degenerates too.
That life is in need of the services of history, however, must be grasped
as firmly as must the proposition, which is to be demonstrated later,
that an excess of history is harmful to the living man. H istory per­
tains to the living man in three respects: it pertains to him as a being
who acts and strives, as a being who preserves and reveres, as a being
who suffers and seeks deliverance. This threefold relationship cor­
responds to three species of history - insofar as it is permissible to
distinguish between a monumental, an antiquarian and a critical species
of history.
History belongs above all to the man of deeds and power, to him
who fights a great fight, 'who needs models, teachers, comforters and
cannot find them among his contemporaries. It belonged thus to
Schiller: for our time is so bad, Goethe said, that the poet no longer
encounters in the human life that surrounds him a nature he can
employ. It is the man of deeds Polybius has in mind when he calls
political h istory the proper preparation for governing a state and the
6 7
r
i
best teacher who, by recalling to us the misfortunes of others,
instructs us in how we may steadfastly endure our own changes of
fortune. He who has learned to recogni:ze in this the meaning of history
is vexed at the sight of inquisitive tourists or pedantic micrologists
clambering about on the pyramids of the great eras of the past;
where he finds inspiration to imitate or to do better, he does not wish
to encounter the idler who, hungry for distraction or excitement,
prowls around as though among pictures in a gallery. Among these
feeble and hopeless idlers, among those around him who seem
active but are in fact merely agitated and bustling, the man of action
avoids despair and disgust by turning his gaze backwards and pausing
for breath in his march towards the goal. H is goal, however, is
happiness, perhaps not his own but often that of a nation or of man­
kind as a whole; he flees from resignation and needs history as a
specific against it. Mostly there is no reward beckoning him on,
unless it be fame, that is, the expectation of a place of honour in the
temple of history, where he in tum can be a teacher, comforter and
admonisher to those who come after hiIJl. For the commandment
which rules over him is: that which in the past was able to expand the
concept 'man' and make it more beautiful must exist everlastingly,
so as to be able to accomplish this everlastingly. That the great
moments in the struggle of the human individual constitute a chain,
that this chain unites mankind across the millennia like a range of
human mountain peaks, that the summit of such a long-ago
moment shall be for me still living, bright and great - that is the
fundamental idea of the faith in humanity which finds expression in
the demand for a monumental history. But it is precisely this demand
that greatness shall be everlasting that sparks off the most fearful of
struggles. For everything else that lives ǰries No. The monumental
shall not come into existence - that is the counter-word. Apathetic
habit, all that is base and petty, filling every corner of the earth and
billowing up around all that is great like a heavy breath of the earth,
casts itself across the path that greatness has to tread on its way to
immortality and retards, deceives, suffocates and stifles it. This path,
however, leads through human brains! Through the brains of
timorous and shortlived animals which emerge again and again to
the same needs and distresses and fend off destruction only with
effort and then only for a short time. For they want first of all but one
thing: to live, at any cost. Who would associate them with that hard
relay-race of monumental history through which alone greatness
goes on living! And yet again and again there awaken some who,
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
gaining strength through reflecting on past greatness, are inspired
with the feeling that the life of man is a glorious thing, and even that
the fairest fruit of this bitter plant is the knowledge that in earlier
times someone passed through this existence infused with pride and
strength, someone else sunk in profound thoughtfulness, a third
exhibiting mercy and helpfulness - all of them, however, leaving
behind them a single teaching: that he lives best who has no respect
for existence. If the common man takes this little span of time with
such gloomy earnestness and clings to it so desperately, those few we
have just spoken of have known, on their way to immortality and to
monumental history, how to regard it with Olympian laughter or at
least with sublime mockery; often they descended to their grave with
an ironic smile - for what was there left of them to bury! Only the
dross, refuse, vanity, animality that had always weighed them down
and that was now consigned to oblivion after having for long been
the object of their contempt. But one thing will live, the monogram
of their most essential being, a work, an act, a piece of rare enlighten­
ment, a creation: it will live because posterity cannot do without it. In
this transfigured form, fame is something more than the tastiest
morsel of our egoism, as Schopenhauer called it: it is the belief in the
solidarity and continuity of the greatness of all ages and a protest
against the passing away of generations and the transitoriness of
things.
Of what use, then, is the monumentalistic conception of the past,.
engagement with the classic and rare of earlier times, to the man of
the present? He learns from it that the greatness that once existed
was in any event once possible and may thus be possible again; he goes
his way with more cheerful step, for the doubt which assailed him in
weaker moments, whether he was not perhaps desiring the impossible,
has now been banished. Supposing someone believed that it would
require no more than a hundred men educated and actively working
in a new spirit to do away with the bogus form of culture which has
just now become the fashion in Germany, how greatly it would
strengthen him to realize that the culture of the Renaissance was
raised on the s houlders of just such a band of a hundred men.
And yet - to learn something new straightaway from this example
how inexact, fluid and provisional that comparison would be!
How much of the past would have to be overlooked if it was to pro­
duce that mighty effect, how violently what is individual in it would
have to be forced into a universal mould and all its sharp corners and
hard outlines broken up in the interest of conformity! At bottom,
indeed, that which was once possible could present' itself as a
possibility for a second time only if the Pythagoreans were right in
believing that when the constellation of the heavenly bodies is
repeated the same things, down to the smallest event, must also be
repeated on earth: so that whenever the stars stand in a certain relation
to one another a Stoic again joins with an Epicurean to murder
Caesar, and when they stand in another relation Columbus will
again discover America. Only if, when the fifth act of the earth's
drama ended, the whole play every time began again from the be­
ginning, if it was certain that the same complex of motives, the same
deus ex machina, the same catastrophe were repeated at definite intervals,
could the man of power venture to desire monumental history in full
icon-like veracity, that is to say with every individual peculiarity
depicted in precise detail: but that will no doubt happen only when
the astronomers have again become aĈtrologers. Until that time,
monumental history will have no use for that absolute veracity: it will
always have to deal in approximations and generalities, in making
what is dissimilar look similar; it will alwaysmave to diminish the dif­
ferences of motives and instigations so as to exhibit the effectus
monumentally, that is to say as something exemplary and worthy of
imitation, at the expense of the causae: so that, since- it as far as possible
ignores causes, one might with only slight exaggeration call it a
collection of ' effects in themselves', of events which will produce an
effect upon all future ages. That which is celebrated at popular fes­
tivals, at religious or military anniversaries, is really such an 'effect in
itself': it is this which will not let the ambitious sleep, which the
brave wear over their heans like an amulet, but it is not the truly his­
torical connexus of cause and effect - which, fully understood, would
only demonstrate that the dice-game of chance and the future could
never again produce anything exactly similar to what it produced in
the past.
As long as the soul of historiography lies in the great stimuli that a
man of power derives from it, as long as the past has to be described
as worthy of imitation, as imitable and possible for a second time, it
of course incurs the danger of becoming somewhat distorted,
beautified and coming close to free poetic invention; there have
been ages, indeed, which were quite incapable of distinguishing be­
tween a monumentalized past and a mythical fiction, because pre­
cisely the same stimuli can be derived from the one world as from
the other. If, therefore, the monumental mode of regarding history
rules over the other modes - I mean over the antiquarian and critical
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
- the past itself suffers harm: whole segments of it are forgotten, des­
pised, and flow away in an uninterrupted colourless flood, and only
individual embellished facts rise out of it like islands: the few per­
sonalities who are visible at all have something strange and
unnatural about them, like the golden hip which the pupils of
Pythagoras supposed they saw on their master. Monument31 history
deceives by analogies: with seductive similarities it inspires the
courageous to foolhardiness and the inspired to fanaticism; and
when we go on to think of this kind of history in the hands and heads
of gifted egoists and visionary scoundrels, then we see empires des­
troyed, princes murdered, wars and revolutions launched and the
number of historical 'effects in themselves', that is to say, effects
without sufficient cause, again augmented. So much as a reminder
of the harm that monumental history can do among men of power
and achievement, whether they be good men or evil: what, however,
is it likely to do when the impotent and indolent take possession ofit
and employ it!
Let us take the simplest and most frequent example. Imagine the
inartistic natures, and those only weakly endowed, armoured and
armed by a monumentalist history of the artists: against whom will
they now tum their weapons? Against their arch..:enemies, the strong
artistic spirits, that is to say against those who alone are capable of
learning from that history in a true, that is to say life-enhancing sense,
and of transforming what they have learned into a more elevated
practice. Their path will be barred, their · air darkened, if a half­
understood monument to some great era of the past is erected as an
idol and zealously danced around, as though to say: 'Behold, this is
true art: pay no heed to those who are evolving and want something
new!' This dancing mob appears to possess even the privilege of
determining what is 'good taste': for the creative man has always
been at a disadvantage compared with those who have only looked
on and taken no part themselves; just as the public house politician
has at all times been cleverer, more judicious and more prudent
than the statesman who actually rules. But if one goes so far as to
employ the popular referendum and the numerical majority in the
domain of art, and as it were compels the artist to defend himself
before the forum of the aesthetically inactive, then you can take your
oath on it in advance that he will be condemned: not in spite of the
fact that his judges have solemnly proclaimed the canon of mohu­
mental art (that is to say, the art which, according to the given defi­
nition, has at all times 'produced an effect'), but precisely because they
7 1
have: while any art which, because contemporary, is not yet monu­
mental, seems to them unnecessary, unattractive and lacking in the
authority conferred by history. On the other hand, their instincts tell
them that art can be slain by art: the monumental is never to be
repeated, and to make sure it is not they invoke the authority which
the monumental derives from the past. They are connoisseurs of art
because they would like to do away with art altogether; they pose as
physicians, while their basic intent is to mix poisons; they develop
their taste and tongue as they do so as to employ this spoiled taste as
an explanation of why they so resolutely reject all the nourishing
artistic food that is offered them. For they do not desire to see new
greatness emerge: their means of preventing it is to say 'Behold,
greatness already exists!' In reality, they are as little concerned about
this greatness that already exists as they are about that which is
emerging: their lives are evidence of this. Monumental history is the
masquerade costume in which their hatred of the great and powerful
of their own age is disguised as satiated admiration for the great and
powerful of past ages, and muffled in which they invert the real
meaning of that mode of regarding history into its opposite; whether
they are aware of it or not, they act as though their motto were: let the
dead bury the living.
Each of the three species of history which exist belongs to a certain
soil and a certain climate and only to that: in any other it grows into a
devastating weed. If the man who wants to do something great has
need of the past at all, he appropriates it by means of monumental
history; "he, on the other hand, who likes to persist in the familiar and
" the revered of old, tends the past as an antiquarian historian; and
only he who is oppressed by a present need, and who wants to throw
off this burden at any cost, has need of critical history, that is to say a
history that judges and condemns. Much mischiefis caused through
the thoughtless transplantation of these plants: the critic without
need, the antiquary without piety, the man who recognizes greatness
but cannot himself do great things, are such plants, estranged from
their mother soil and degenerated into weeds.
History thus belongs in the second place to him who preserves and
reveres - to him who looks back to whence he has come, to where he
came into being, with love and loyalty; with this piety he as it were
gives thanks for his existence. By tending with care that which has
On the uses and disadvantages of history for lift
existed from of old, he wants to preserve for those who shall come
into existence after him the conditions under which he himself came
into existence - and thus he serves life. The possession of ancestral
goods changes its meaning in such a soul: they rather possess it. The
trivial, circumscribed, decaying and obsolete acquire ·their own
dignity and inviolability through the fact that the preserving and
revering soul of the antiquarian man has emigrated into them and
there made its home. The history of his city becomes for him the his­
tory of himself; he reads its walls, its towered gate, its rules and
regulations, its holidays, like an illuminated diary of his youth and in
all this he finds again himself, his force, his industry, his joy, his
judgment, his folly and vices. Here we lived, he says to himself, for
here we are living; and here we shall live, for we are tough and not to
be ruined overnight. Thus with the aid of this 'we' he looks beyond
his own individual transitory existence and feels himself to be the
spirit of his house, his race, his city. Sometimes he even greets the
soul of his nation across the long dark centuries of confusion as his
own soul; an ability to feel his way back and sense how things were,
to detect traces almost extinguished, to read the past quickly and
correctly no matter how intricate its palimpsest may be
these are
his talents and virtues. Endowed with these talents and virtues
Goethe stood before Erwin von Steinbach's monumental work; in
the storm of his feelings the historical clouds which veiled the time
between them were rent apart: it was his recognition, at first sight, of
the German work of art 'exerting its power through a strong, rough
German soul'. It was the same tendency which directed the Italians
of the Renaissance and reawoke in their poets the genius of ancient
Italy to a 'wonderful new resounding of the primeval strings', as
Jakob Burckhardt puts it. But this antiquarian sense of veneration of
the past is of the greatest value when it spreads a simple feeling of
pleasure and contentment over the modest; rude, even wretched
conditions in which a man or a nation lives; Niebuhr, for example,
admits with honourable candour that on moor and heathland,
among free peasants who possess a history, he can live contented and
never feel the want of art. How could history serve life better than
when it makes the less favoured generations and peoples contented
with their own homeland and its customs, and restrains them from
roving abroad in search of something they think more worth having
and engaging in battles for it? Sometimes this clinging to one's own
environment and companions, one's own toilsome customs, one's
own bare mountainside, looks like obstinacy and ignorance - yet it is
a very salutary ignorance and one most calculated to further the
interests of the community: a fact of which anyone must be aware
who knows the dreadful consequences of the desire for expeditions
and adventures, especially when it seizes whole hordes of nations,
and who has seen from close up the condition a nation gets into
when it has ceased to be faithful to its own origins and is given over to
a restless, cosmopolitan hunting after new and ever newer things.
The feeling antithetical to this, the contentment of the tree in its
roots, the happiness of knowing that one is not wholly accidental and
arbitrary but grown out of a past as its heir, flower and fruit, and that
one's existence is thus excused and, indeed, justified - it is this which
is today usually designated as the real sense of history.
This notwithstanding, such a condition is certainly not one in
which a man would be most capable of resolving the past into pure
knowledge; so that here too, as in the case of monumental history,
we perceive that, as long as the study of history serves life and is
directed by the vital drives, the past itself suffers. To employ a some­
what free metaphor: the tree is aware of iĆ roots to a greater degree
than it is able to see them; but this awareness judges how big they are
from the size and strength of its' visible branches. If, however, the
tree is in error as to this, how greatly it will be in error regarding all
the rest of the forest around it! - for it knows of the forest only that in
it which obstructs or favours it and nothing beside. The antiquarian
sense of a man, a community, a whole people, always possesses an
extremely restricted field of vision; most of what exists it does not
perceive at all, and the little it does see it sees much too close up and
isolated; it cannot relate what it sees to anything else and it therefore
accords everything it sees equal importance and therefore to each
individual thing too 'great imponance. There is a lack of that dis­
crimination of value and that sense of proponion which would dis­
tinguish between the things of the past in a way that would do true
justice to them; their measure and proportion is always that accorded
them by the backward glance of the antiquarian nation or
individual.
This always produces one very imminent danger: everything old
and past that enters one's field of vision at all is in the end blandly
taken to be equally worthy of reverence, while everything that does
not approach this antiquity with reverence, that is to say everything
new and evolving, is rejected and persecuted. Thus even the Greeks
tolerated the hieratic style in their plastic ans beside the free and
great; later, indeed, they did not merely tolerate the elevated nose
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
and the frosty smile but even made a cult of it. When the senses of a
people harden in this fashion, when the study of history selVes the
life of the past in such a way that it undermines continuing and
especially higher life, when the historical sense no longer conselVes
life but mummifies it, then the tree gradually dies unnaturally from
the top downwards to the roots - and in the end the roots themselves
usually perish too. Antiquarian history itself degenerates from the
moment it is no longer animated and inspired by the fresh life of the
present. Its piety withers away, the habit of scholarliness continues
without it and rotates in egoistic self-satisfaction around its own axis.
Then there appears the repulsive spectacle of a blind rage for collecting,
a restless raking together of everything that has ever existed. Man is
encased in the stench of must and mould; through the antiquarian
approach he succeeds in reducing even a more creative disposition,
a nobler desire, to an insatiable thirst for novelty, or rather for an­
tiquity and for all and everything; often he sinks so low that in the
end he is content to gobble down any food whatever, even the dust of
bibliographical minutiae.
But even when this degeneration does not take place, when anti­
quarian history does not lose the foundation in which alone it must
be rooted if it is to benefit life, sufficient dangers remain should it
grow too mighty and overpower the other modes of regarding the
past. For it knows only how to preserve life, not how to engender it; it
always undeIValues that which is becoming because it has no instinct
for divining it
as monumental history, for example, has. Thus it
hinĉt.rs any firm resolve to attempt something new, thus it paralyses the
man of action who, as one who acts, will and must offend some piety or
other. The fact that something has grown old now gives rise to the
demand that it be made immortal; for when one considers all that
such an antiquity - an ancient custom of the ancestors, a religious
belief, an inherited political privilege - has experienced during the
course of its existence, how great a sum of piety and reverence on the
part of individuals and generations, then it must seem arrogant or
even wicked to replace such an antiquity with a novelty and to set
against such a numerical accumulation of acts of piety and reverence
the single unit of that which is evolving and has just arrived.
Here it becomes clear how necessary it is to mankind to have,
beside the monumental and antiquarian modes of regarding the
past, a third mode, the critical: and this, too, in the seIVice oflife. If he
is to live, man must possess and from time to time employ the
strength to break up and dissolve a part of the past: he does this by
bringing it before the tribunal, scrupulously examining i't and finally
condemning it; every past, however, is worthy to be condemned ­
for that is the nature of human things: human violence and weakness
have always played a mighty role in them. It is not justice which here
sits in judgment; it is even less mercy which pronounces the verdict:
it is life alone, that dark, driving power that insatiably thirsts for
itself. Its sentence is always unmerciful, always unjust, because it has
never proceeded out of a pure well of knowledge; but in most cases
the sentence would be the same even ifit were pronounced by justice
itself. ' For all that exists is worthy of perishing. So it would be better if
nothing existed.' It requires a great deal of strength to be able to live
and to forget the extent to which to live and to be unjust is one and
the same thing. Luther himself once opined that the world existed
only through a piece of forgetful negligence on God's part: for if God
had foreseen 'heavy artillery' he would not have created the world.
Sometimes, however, this same life that requires forgetting demands
a temporary suspension of this forgetfulness; it wants to be clear as to
how unjust the existence of any thing - a privilege, a caste, a dynasty,
for example - is, and how greatly this thing deserves to perish. Then
its past is regarded critically, then one takes the knife to its rootsƫ then
one cruelly tramples over every kind of piety. It is always a
dangerous process, especially so for life itself: and men and ages
which serve life by judging and destroying a past are always
dangerous and endangered men and ages. For since we are the out­
come of earlier generations, we are also the outcome of their aber­
rations, passions and errors, and indeed of their crimes; it is not
possible wholly to free oneself from this chain. If we condemn these
aberrations and regard ourselves as free of them, this does not alter
the fact that we originate in them. The best we can do is to confront
our inherited and hereditary nature with our knowledge, and
through a new, stern discipline combat our inborn heritage and
inplant in ourselves a new habit, a new instinct, a second nature, so
that our first nature withers away. It is an attempt to give oneself, as it
were a posteriori, a past in which one would like to originate in oppo­
sition to that in which one did originate: - always a dangerous
attempt because it is so hard to know the limit to denial of the past
and because second natures are usually weaker than first. What hap­
pens all too often is that we know the good but do not do it, because
we also know the better but cannot do it. But here and there a victory
is nonetheless achieved, and for the combatants, for those who
On the uses and disadvantages of history Jor life
employ critical history for the sake of life, there is even a noteworthy
consolation: that of knowing that this first nature was once a second
nature and that every victorious second nature will become a
first.
These are the services history is capable of performing for life; every
man and every nation requires, in accordance with its goals, energies
and needs, a certain kind of knowledge of the past, now in the form
of monumental, now of antiquarian, now of critical history: but it
does not require it as a host of pure thinkers who only look on at life,
of knowledge-thirsty individuals whom knowledge alone will satisfy
and to whom the accumulation of knowledge is itself the goal, but
always and only for the ends of life and thus also under the domi­
nation and supreme direction of these ends. That this is the natural
relationship of an age, a culture, a nation with its history - evoked by
hunger, regulated by the extent of its need, held in bounds by its
inherent plastic powers - that knowledge of the past has at all times
been desired only in the service of the future and the present and not
for the weakening of the present or for depriving a vigorous future of
its roots: all this is simple, as the truth is simple, and will at once be
obvious even to him who has not had it demonstrated by
historical proof.
And' now let us quickly take a look at our own time! We are startled,
we shy away: where has all the clarity, all the naturalness and purity
of this relationship between life and history gone? in what restless
and exaggerated confusion does this problem now swell before our
eyes! Does the fault lie with us, who observe it? Or has the con­
stellation of life and history really altered through the interposition
of a mighty, hostile star between them? Let others show that we have
seen falsely: for our part we shall say what we think we see. And what
we see is certainly a star, a gleaming and glorious star interposing
itself, the constellation really has been altered - by science, by the
demand that history should be a science. Now the demands oflife alone no
longer reign and exercise constraint on knowledge of the past: now
all the frontiers have been torn down and all that has ever been
rushes upon mankind. All perspectives have been shifted back to the
beginning of all becoming, back into infinity. Such an immense
spectacle as the science of universal becoming, history, now displays
has never before been seen by any generation; though it displays it,
to be sure, with the perilous daring of its motto: fiat veritas, 'pereat
vita. ':'
Let us now picture the spiritual occurrence introduced into the
soul of modern man by that which we have just described. Historical
knowledge streams in unceasingly from inexhaustible wells, the
strange and incoherent forces its way forward, memory opens all its
gates and yet is not open wide enough, nature travails in an effort to
receive, arrange and honour these strange guests, but they them­
selves are in conflict with one another and it seems necessary to con­
strain and control them if one is not oneself to perish in their
conflict. Habituation to such a disorderly, stormly and conflict­
ridden household gradually becomes a second nature, though this
second nature is beyond question much weaker, much more rest­
less, and thoroughly less sound than the first. In the end, modern
man drags around with him a huge quantity of indigestible stones of
knowledge, which then, as in the fairy tale, can sometimes be heard
rumbling about inside him. And in this r}fmbling there is betrayed
the most characteristic quality of modern man: the remarkable
antithesis between an interior which fails to correspond to any
exterior and an exterior which fails to correspond to any interior - an
antithesis unknown to the peoples of earlier times. Knowledge, con­
sumed for the greater part without hunger for it and even counter to
one's needs, now no longer acts as an agent for transforming the out­
side world but remains concealed within a chaotic inner world
which modern man describes with a curious pride as his uniquely
characteristic inwardness. It is then said that one possesses content
and only form is lacking; but such an antithesis is quite improper
when applied to living things. This precisely is why our modern cul­
ture is not a living thing: it is incomprehensible without recourse to
that antithesis; it is not a real culture at all but only a kind of
knowledge of culture; it has an idea of and feeling for culture but no
true cultural achievement emerges from them. What actually
inspires it and then appears as a visible act, on the other hand, often
signifies not much more than an indifferent convention, a pitiful
imitation or even a crude caricature. Cultural sensibility then lies
quietly within, like a snake that has swallowed rabbits whole and
now lies in the sun and avoids all unnecessary movement. The inner
process is now the thing itself, is what actually constitutes 'culture'.
"'fiat veritas, pereat vita: let truth prevail though life perish
On the uses and disadvantages of history for lifo
Anyone observing this has only one wish, that such a culture should
not perish of indigestion. Imagine, for example, a Greek observing
such a culture: he would perceive that for modern man 'educated'
and 'historically educated' seem so to belong together as to mean
one and the same thing and to differ only verbally. If h€ then said
that one can be very educated and yet at the same time altogether
uneducated historically, modern men would think they had failed to
hear him aright and would shake their heads. That celebrated little
nation of a not so distant past - I mean these same Greeks
during
the period of their greatest strength kept a tenacious hold on their
unhistorical sense; if a present-day man were magically transported
back to that world he would probably consider the Greeks very
'uncultured' - whereby, to be sure, the secret of modern culture, so
scrupulously hidden, would be exposed to public ridicule: for we
moderns have nothing whatever of our own; only by replenishing
and cramming ourselves with the ages, customs, arts, philosophies,
religions, discoveries of others do we become anything worthy of
notice, that is to say, walking encyclopaedias, which is what an
ancient Greek transported into our own time would perhaps take us
for. With encyclopaedias, however, all the value lies in what is con­
tained within, in the content, not in what stands without, the binding
and cover; so it is that the whole of modern culture is essentially
inward: on the outside the bookbinder has printed some such thing
as 'Handbook of inward culture for outward barbarians'. This
antithesis of inner and outer, indeed, makes the exterior even more
barbaric than it would be if a rude nation were only to develop out of
itself in accordance with its own uncouth needs. For what means are
available to nature for overcoming that which presses upon it in too
great abundance? One alone: to embrace it as lightly as possible so
as quickly to expel it again and have done with it. From this comes a
habit of no longer taking real things seriously, from this arises the
'weak personality' by virtue of which the real and existent makes
only a slight impression; one becomes ever more negligent of one's
outer appearance and, provided the memory is continually
stimulated by a stream of new things worth knowing which can be
stored tidily away in its coffers, one finally widens the dubious gulf
between content and form to the point of complete insensibility to
barbarism. The culture of a people as the antithesis to this barbarism
was once, and as I think with a certain justice, defined as unity of
artistic style in all the expressions of the life of a people; this defi­
nition should not be misunderstood in the sense of implying an
l.
I·,:":
} !
l
,
\ '
i
!
: < ;
antithesis between barbarism and fine style; what is' meant is that a
people to whom one attributes a culture has to be in all reality a
single living unity and not fall wretchedly apart into inner and outer,
content and form. He who wants to strive for and promote the cul­
ture of a people should strive for and promote this higher unity and
join in the destruction of modern bogus cultivated ness for the sake
of a true culture; he should venture to reflect how the health of a people
undermined by the study of history may be again restored, how it
may rediscover its instincts and therewith its honesty.
I may as well speak directly of ourselves, we Germans of the present
day who are more afflicted than other nations by that weakness of
personality and that contradiction between form and content. Form
generally counts with us as a convention, as a vestment and disguise,
and it is therefore, if not exactly hated, at any rate not loved; it would
be even more correct to say that we have an extraordinary fear of the
word 'convention' and, no doubt, also of the thing. It was this fear
which led the German to desert the school of France: he wanted to
become more natural and thereby mOJie German. But this 'thereby'
seems to have been a miscalculation: escaped from the school of
convention, he then let himself go in whatever manner his fancy
happened to suggest to him, and at bottom did no more than imitate
in a slovenly and half-forgetful way what he had formerly imitated
with scrupulous care and often with success. So it is that, compared
with past ages, we dwell even today in a carelessly inaccurate copy of
French convention: a fact to which all our comings and goings, con­
versations, clothing and habitations bear witness. We thought we
were retreating into naturalness, but what we were really doing was
letting ourselves go and electing for ease and comfort and the
smallest possible degree of self-discipline. Take a stroll through a
German city - compared with the distinct national qualities dis­
played in foreign cities, all the conventions here are negative ones,
everything is colourless, worn out, badly copied, negligent,
everyone does as he likes but what he likes is never forceful and well
considered but follows the rules laid down first by universal haste,
then by the universal rage for ease and comfort. A garment which
costs no intelligence to design and no time to put on, that is to say a
garment borrowed from abroad and imitated in the most easygoing
way possible, at once counts with the Germans as a contribution to
German national dress. The sense of form is rejected without the
slightest misgiving - for we possess the sense of the content: for the
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
Germans are, after all, celebrated for their profound inwardness.
But this inwardness also carries with it a celebrated danger: the
content itself, of which it is assumed that it cannot be seen from
without, may occasionally evaporate; from without, however,
neither its former presence nor its disappearance will be apparent at
all. But however far from this danger we may imagine the German
people to be, the foreigner will still be to some extent justified in
maintaining that our interior is too feeble and disorganized to
produce an outward effect and endow itself with a form. The in­
terior of the Germans can be receptive to an exceptional degree:
serious, powerful, profound, and perhaps even richer than that of
other nations; but as a whole it remains weak because all these
beautiful threads are not wound together into a powerful knot: so
that the visible act is not the act and self-revelation of the totality
of this interior but only a feeble or crude attempt on the part of
one or other of these threads to pose as being the whole. That is
why the German cannot be judged by his actions and why as an
individual he is still completely hidden even after he has acted. As
is well known, he has to be assessed according to his thoughts and
feelings, and these he nowadays expresses in his books. If only it
were not precisely these books which, now more than ever before,
lead us to doubt whether that celebrated inwardness really does
still reside in its inaccessible little temple; it is a dreadful thought
that one day they might disappear and all that would be left to sig­
nalize" the German would be his arrogantly clumsy and meekly
slovenly exterior: almost as dreadful as if that hidden inwardness
were sitting in there falsified and painted over and had become
an actor if not something worse. This, at any rate, is what
Grillparzer, as an independent observer, seems to have gathered
from his experience in the theatre. 'We feel in abstractions', he
says, 'we hardly know any longer how feeling really expresses itself
with our contemporaries; we show them performing actions such
as they no longer perform nowadays. Shakespeare has ruined all
of us moderns.'
This is a single case and perhaps it has been generalized too hastily:
but how fearful it would be if such a generalization were justified, if a
host of individual cases should crowd in upon the observer; how
desolating it would be to have to say: we Germans feel in abstrac­
tions, we have all been ruined by history - a proposition which
would destroy at its roots all hope of a future national culture: for
8 1
any such hope grows out of the belief in the genuineness and
immediacy of German feeling, out of the belief in a sound and whole
inwardness. What is there left to hope for or believe in if the source
of hope and belief is muddied, if inwardness has learned to make
leaps, to dance, to paint itself, to express itself in abstractions and
with calculation and gradually to lose itself1 And how should the
great productive spirit continue to endure among a people no
longer secure in a unified inwardness and which falls asunder into
the cultivated with a miseducated and misled inwardness on the
one hand and the uncultivated with an inaccessible i nwardness on
the other! How should that spirit endure if unity of feeling among
the people has been lost, and if, moreover, it knows that this feeling
is falsified and retouched precisely among that part of the people
which calls itself the cultured part and lays claim to possession of the
national artistic conscience? Even if here and there an individual's
taste and judgment has grown more subtle and sublimated, that is no
advantage to him: he is racked by the knowledge that he has to speak
as it were to a sect and is no longer needeß in the body of his nation.
Perhaps he now prefers to bury his treasure rather than suffer the
disgust of being presumptuously patronized by a sect while his heart
is full of pity for all. The instinct of the nation no longer comes out to
meet h im; it is useless for him to stretch out his arms towards them
in longing. What is there now left to this spirit but to turn his inspired
hatred against that constraint, against the barriers erected in the so­
called culture of his nation, so as to condemn what to him, as a living
being and one productive of life, is destructive and degrading: thus
he exchanges a profound insight into his destiny for the divine joys
of creation and construction, and ends as a solitary man of
knowledge and satiated sage. It is the most painful of spectacles: he
who beholds it will know a sacred compulsion: here, he says to him­
self, I must render aid, that higher unity in the nature and soul of a
people must again be created, that breach between inner and outer
must again vanish under the hammer-blows of necessiry. But what
weapons can he employ? What does he have but, again, his pro­
found insight: propagating it and sowing it with full hands he hopes
to implant a need: and out of a vigorous need there will one day arise
a vigorous deed. And so as to leave no doubt of the source of my
example of that need, that necessity, that perception, let me say
expressly that it is for German unity in that highest sense that we strive,
and strive more ardently than we do for political reunification, the
unity of German 'spirit and life after the abolition of the antithesis of form and
content, of inwardness and convention. -
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
The oversaturation of an age with history seems to me to be hostile
and dangerous to life in five respects: such an excess creates that con­
trast between inner and outer which we have just discussed, and
thereby weakens the personality; it leads an age to imagine that it
possesses the rarest of virtues, justice, to a greater degree than any
other age; it disrupts the instincts of a people, and hinders the
individual no less than the whole in the attainment of maturity; it
implants the belief, harmful at any time, in the old age of mankind,
the belief that one is a latecomer and epigone; it leads an age into a
dangerous mood of irony in regard to itself and subsequently into
the even more dangerous mood of cynicism: in this mood, however,
it develops more and more a prudent practical egoism through
which the forces of life are paralyzed and at last destroyed.
And now back to our first proposition: modern man'suffers from a
weakened personality. As the Roman of the imperial era became un­
Roman in relation to the world which stood at his service, as he lost
himself in the flood of foreigners which came streaming in and
degenerated in the midst of the cosmopolitan carnival of gods, arts
and customs, so the same muƬt happen to modern man who allows
his artists in history to go on 'preparing a world exhibition for him;
he has become a strolling spectator and has arrived at a condition in
which .even great wars and revolutions are able to influence him for
hardly more than a moment. The war is not even over before it is
transformed into a hundred thousand pri nted pages and set before
the tired palates of the history-hungry as the latest delicacy. It seems
that the instrument is almost incapable of producing a strong and
full note, no matter how vigorously it is played: its tones at once die
away and in a moment have faded to a tender historical echo.
Expressed morally: you are no longer capable of holding on to the
sublime, your deeds are shortlived explosions, not rolling thunder.
Though the greatest and most miraculous event should occur
it
must nonetheless descend, silent and unsung, into Hades. For art
flees away if you immediately conceal your deeds u nder the awning
of history. He who wants to understand, grasp and assess in a
moment that before which he ought to stand long in awe as before an
incomprehensible sublimity may be called reasonable, but only in
the sense in which Schiller speaks of the rationality of the reasonable
man: there are things he does nOL see which even a child sees, there
are things he does not hear which even a child hears, and these
things are precisely the most important things: because he does not
understand these things, his understanding is more childish than
the child and more simple than simplicity - and this in spite of the
many cunning folds of his parchment scroll and the virtuosity of his
fingers in unravelling the entangled. The reason is that he has lost
and destroyed his instincts and, having lost his trust in the 'divine
animal', he can no longer let go the reins when his reason falters and
his path leads him through deserts. Thus the individual grows
fainthearted and unsure and dares no longer believe in himself: he
sinks into his own interior depths, which here means into the
accumulated lumber of what he has learned but which has no out­
ward effect, of instruction which does not become life. If one
watches him from outside, one sees how the expulsion of the
instincts by history has transformed man almost into mere abstractis
and shadows: no one dares to appear as he is, but masks himself as a
cultivated man, as a scholar, as a poet, as a politician. If, believing all
this to be in earnest and not a mere puppet-play - for they all affect
earnestness - one takes hold of these rtla£ks, one suddenly has nothing
but rags and tatters in one's hands. That is why one should no longer
let oneself be deceived, that is why one should order them: 'Off with
your coats or be what you seem!' It can no longer be borne that
everyone of a noble seriousness should become a Don Quixote:
since he has better things to do than to buffet about with such false
realities. But he must nonetheless keep a sharp lookout, whenever he
encounters a mask cry his 'Halt! Who goes there?' and tear the .mask
from its face. Strange!
One would think that history would
encourage men to be honest - even if only honest fools; and hitherto
this has indeed been its effect, only now it is no longer! Historical
education and the identical bourgeois coat rule at the same time.
While the 'free personality' has never before been commended so
volubly, there are no personalities to be seen, let alone free per­
sonalities
nothing but anxiously muffled up identical people.
Individuality has withdrawn within: from without it has become
invisible; a fact which leads one to ask whether indeed there could be
causes without effects. Or is a race of eunuchs needed to watch over
the great historical world-harem? Pure objectivity would certainly
characterize such a race. For it almost seems that the task is to stand
guard over history to see that nothing comes out of it except more
history, and certainly no real events! - to take care that history does
not make any personality 'free', that is to say truthful towards itself,
truthful towards others, in both word and deed. It is only through
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
such truthfulness that the distress, the inner misery, of modern man
will come to light, and that, in place of that anxious concealment
through convention and masquerade, art and religion, true
ancillariest will be able to combine to implant a culture which cor­
responds to real needs and does not, as present-day universal edu­
cation teaches it to do, deceive itself as to these needs and thereby
become a walking lie.
In an age which suffers from this universal education, to what an
unnatural, artificial and in any case unworthy state must the most
truthful of all sciences, the honest naked goddess philosophy, be
reduced! In such a world of compelled external uniformity it must
remain the learned monologue of the solitary walker, the individual's
chance capture, the hidden secret of the chamber, or the harmless
chatter of academic old men and children. No one dares venture to
fulfil the philosophical law in himself, no one lives philosophically
with that simple loyalty that constrained a man of antiquity to bear
himself as a Stoic wherever he was, whatever he did, once he had
affirmed his loyalty to the Stoa. All modern philosophizing is political
and official, limited by governments, churches, academies, customs
and the cowardice of men to the appearance of scholarship; it sighs
'if only' or knows 'there once was' and .does nothing else. Within a
historical culture philosophy possesses no rights if it wants to be
more than a self-restrained knowing which leads to no action; if
modern man had any courage or resolution at all, if he were not
merely a subjective creature even in his enmities, he would banish
philosophy; as it is, he contents himself with mod.estly concealing its
nudity. One may think, write, print, speak, teach philosophy - to
that point more or less everything is permitted; only in the realm of
action, of so-called life, is it otherwise: there only one thing is ever
permitted and everything else simply impossible: thus will historical
culture have it. Are there still human beings, one then asks oneself,
or perhaps only thinking-, writing- and speaking-machines?
Goethe once said of Shakespeare: 'No one despised outward cos­
tume more than he; he knew very well the inner human costume,
and here all are alike. They say he hit off the Romans admirably; but
I don't find it so, they are all nothing but flesh-and-blood
Englishmen, but they are certainly human beings, human from
head to foot, and the Roman toga sits on them perfectly well.' N ow I
ask whether it would be possible to represent our contemporary
men of letters, popular figures, officials or politicians as Romans; it
simply would not work, because they are not human beings but only
-I
I:
flesh-and-blood compendia and as it were abstractions made con­
crete. If they possess a character of their own it is buried so deep it
cannot get out into the light of day: if they are human beings they are
so only to him 'who explores the depths'. To anyone else they are
something different, not men, not gods, not animals, but creations
of historical culture, wholly structure, image, form without
demonstrable content and, unhappily, ill-designed form and, what
is more, uniform. And so let my proposition be understood and
pondered: history can be borne only by strong personalities, weak ones are
utterly extinguished by it. The reason is that history confuses the feelings
and sensibility when these are not strong enough to assess the past
by themselves. He who no longer dares to trust himself but involun­
tarily asks of history 'How ought I to feel about this?' finds that his
timidity gradually turns him into an actor and that he is playing a
role, usually indeed many roles and therefore playing them badly
and superficially. Gradually all congruity between the man and his
historical domain is lost; we behold pert little fellows associating
with the Romans as though they were thefr equals: and they root and
burrow in the remains of the Greek poets as though these too were
corpora for their dissection and were as vilia as their own literary corpora
may be. * Suppose one of them is engaged with Democritus, I always '
feel like asking: why not Heraclitus? Or Philo? Or Bacon? Or
Descartes?
or anyone else. And then: why does it have to be a
philosopher? Why not a poet or an orator? And: why a Greek at all,
why not an Englishman or a Turk? Is the past not big enough for you
to be able to find nothing except things in comparison with which
you cut so ludicrous a figure? But, as I have said, this is a race of
eunuchs, and to a eunuch one woman is like another, simply a
woman, woman in herself, the eternally unapproachable
and it is
thus a matter of indifference what they do so long as history itself is
kept nice and 'objective', bearing in mind that those who want to
keep it so are for ever incapable of making history themselves. And
since the eternally womanly will never draw you upward, you draw it
down to you and, being neuters, take history too for a neuter. t But
so that it shall not be thought that I am seriously comparing history
*vilia corpora: vile bodies
t Alludes to the closing lines of Goethe's Faust II: 'Das Ewig-Weibliche/Zieht uns
hinan'. Nietzsche often alludes to the phrase, always in an ironic-humorous tone: he
fait('d, I think, to discover any meaning in it.
On the uses and disadvantages oj history for life
with the eternally womanly, I should like to make it clear that, on the
contrary, I regard it rather as the eternally manly: though, to be sure,
for those who are 'historically educated' through and through it
must be a matter of some indifference whether it is the one or the
other: for they themselves are neither man nor woman, nor even
hermaphrodite, but always and only neuters or, to speak more
cultivatedly, the eternally objective.
If the personality is emptied in the manner described and has
become eternally subjectless or, as it is usually put, objective, nothing
can affect it any longer; good and right things may be done, as deeds,
poetry, music: the hollowed-out cultivated man at once looks
beyond the work and asks about the history of its author. If he has
already several other works behind him, he is at once obliged to have
explained to him the previous and possible future progress of his
development, he is at once compared with other artists, criticized as
to his choice of subject and his treatment of it, dissected, carefully
put together again, and in general admonished and set on the right
path. The most astonishing thing may come to pass
the host of the
historically neutral is always there ready to supervise the author of it
even while he is still far off. The echo is heard immediately: but
always as a 'critique', though the moment before the critic did not so
much as dream of the possibility of what has been done. The work
never produces an effect but only another 'critique'; and the critique
itself produces no effect either, but again only a further critique.
There thus arises a general agreement to regard the acquisition of
many critiques as a sign of success, of few or none as a sign of failure.
At bottom, however, even given this kind of 'effect' everything
remains as it was: people have some new thing to chatter about for a
while, and then something newer still, and in the meantime go on
doing what they have always done. The historical culture of our
critics will no longer permit any effect at all in the proper sense, that
is an effect on life and action: their blotting-paper at once goes down
even on the blackest writing, and across the most graceful design
they smear their thick brush-strokes which are supposed to be regarded
as corrections: and once again that is the end of that. But their critical
pens never cease to flow, for they have lost control of them and
instead of directing them are directed by them. It is precisely in this
immoderation of its critical outpourings, in its lack of self-control, in
that which the Romans call impotentia, that the modern personality
betrays its weakness.
8 7
But let us leave this weakness behind; and let us turn to a much
celebrated strength of modern man with the question, a painful one
to be sure, as to whether on account of his well-known historical
'objectivity' he has a right to call himself strong, that is to say just, and
just in a higher degree than men of other ages. Is it true that this
objectivity originates in an enhanced need and demand for justice?
Or is it an effect of quite different causes and only appears to
originate in a desire for justice? Does it perhaps seduce one to a
harmful, because all too flattering, prejudice as to the virtues of
modern man?
Socrates considered that to delude oneself that one
possesses a virtue one does not possess is an illness bordering on
madness: and such a delusion is certainly more dangerous than the
opposite illusion of being the viaim of a fault or a vice. For in the latter
case it is at any rate possible one will become better; the former de­
lusion, however, makes a man or an age daily worse - which in the
present instance means more unjust.
In truth, no one has a greater claim t our veneration than he who
possesses the drive to and strength for justice. For the highest and
rarest virtues are united and concealed in justice as in an unfathom­
able ocean that receives streams and rivers from all sides and takes
them into itself. The hand of the just man who is empowered to
judge no longer trembles when it holds the scales; he sets weight
upon weight with inexorable disregard of himself, his eye is
unclouded as it sees the scales rise and fall, and his voice is neither
harsh nor tearful when he pronounces the verdict. If he were a cold
demon of knowledge, he would spread about him the icy
atmosphere of a dreadful suprahuman majesty which we would
have to fear, not revere: but that he is a human being and yet none­
theless tries to ascend from indulgent doubt to stern certainty, from
tolerant mildness to the imperative 'you must', from the rare virtue
of magnanimity to the rarest of all virtues, justice; that he resembles
that demon but is from the start only a poor human being; and
above all that he has every moment to atone for his humanity and is
tragically consumed by an impossible virtue - all this sets him on a
solitary height as the most venerable exemplar of the species man; for
he desires truth, not as cold, ineffectual knowledge, but as a regulating
and punishing judge; truth, not as the egoistic possession of the
individual, but as the sacred right to overturn all the boundary­
stones of egoistic possessions; in a word, truth as the Last
Judgment and not, for instance, as the prey joyfully seized by the
individual huntsman. Only insofar as the truthful man possesses the
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
unconditional will to justice is there anything great in that striving
for truth which is everywhere so thoughtlessly glorified: whereas
in the eyes of less clear-sighted men a whole host of the most vari­
ous drives - curiosity, flight from boredo:rn, envy, vanity, the desire
for amusement, for example - can be involved in the striving for
truth, though in reality they have nothing whatever to do with
truth, which has its roots in justice. Thus the world seems to be
full of those who 'serve truth', yet the virtue of justice is rarely
present, even more rarely recognized and almost always mortally
hated: while on the other hand the horde of those who only
appear virtuous is at all times received with pomp and honour.
The truth is that few serve truth because few possess the pure will
to justice, and of these few only a few also possess the strength
actually to be just. To possess only the will is absolutely not
enough: and the most terrible sufferings sustained by mankind
have proceeded precisely from those possessing he drive to justice
but lacking the power of judgment; which is why nothing would
promote the general wellbeing more mightily than to sow the
seeds of correct judgment as widely as possible, so that the fanatic
would be distinguished from the judge and the blind desire to be
a judge from the conscious ability to judge. But where could a
means of implanting the power of judgment be found! - man will
always remain in doubt and trepidation whether, when truth and
justice are spoken of, it is a fanatic or a judge who is speaking to
them. That is why they must be forgiven if they have always
extended an especially cordial welcome to those 'servants of
truth' who possess neither the will nor the power to judge and set
themselves the task of seeking 'pure, self-subsistent' knowledge or,
more clearly, truth that eventuates in nothing. There are very
many truths that are a matter of complete indifference; there are
problems whose just solution does not demand even an effort, let
alone a sacrifice. In this region of indifference and absence of
danger a man may well succeed in becoming a cold demon of
knowledge: and nonetheless, even if in favourable times whole
cohorts of scholars and inquirers are transformed into such
demons - it will always fortunately be possible that such an age
will suffer from a lack of a stern and great sense of justice, that is,
of the noblest centre of the so-called drive to truth.
Now picture to yourself the historical virtuoso of the present day:
is he the justest man of his time? It is true he has developed in him­
self such a tenderness and susceptibility of feeling that nothing
human is alien to him; the most various ages and persons continue
to sound in kindred notes on the strings of his lyre: he has become a
passive sounding-board whose reflected tones act upon other
similar sounding-boards: until at last the whole air of an age is filled
with the confused humming of these tender and kindred echoes. Yet
it seems to me as though only the harmonics of the original historical
note are audible: the solidity and power of the original can no longer
be divined in the shrill and bubble-thin vibrations of these strings.
The original note recalled actions, distress, terrors; this note lulls us
and makes of us tame spectators; it is as though the 'Eroica'
Symphony had been arranged for two flutes for the entertainment of
drowsy opium-smokers. Through this we are already in a position to
assess how these virtuosi will stand in regard to modern man's su­
preme claim to a higher and purer sense of justice; this virtue never
has anything pleasing about it, knows no delicious tremors, is harsh
and dread-inspiring. In comparison, how low even magnanimity
stands in the scale of the virtues, and magnanimity is itself possessed
by only a few rare historians! Many more of them attain only to
tolerance, to allowing validity to what tj1ey cannot deny happened,
to explaining away and extenuating, on the correct assumption that
the inexperienced will interpret the mere absence of abrasiveness
and harsh condemnation of the past as evidence of a just disposition.
But only superior strength can judge, weakness is obliged to tolerate
if it is not to make a hypocritical pretence of strength and turn justice
sitting in judgment into an actor. There still remains a dreadful
species of historian, efficient, severe and honest of character but
narrow of mind; the will to be just is there, as is the pathos attending
the office of judge: but all their verdicts are false, for approximately
the same reason as the verdicts of ordinary court juries are false.
How improbable it thus is that there should be an abundance of
talent for history! Quite apart from the disguised egoists and party­
men who employ an air of objectivity in furtherance of their crooked
game. And quite apart also from those wholly thoughtless people
who when they write history do so in the naive belief that all the
popular views of precisely their own age are the right and just views
and that to write in accord with the views of their age is the same
thing as being just; a belief in which every religion dwells and about
which in the case of religions no further comment is needed. These
naive historians call the assessment of the opinions and deeds of the
past according to the everyday standards of the present moment
'objectivity': it is here they discover the canon of all truth; their task is
to adapt the past to contemporary triviality. On the other hand, they
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
call all historiography 'subjective' that does not accept these popular
standards as canonical.
And may an illusion not creep into the word objectivity even in its
highest interpretation? According to this interpretation, the word
means a condition in the historian which permits him to observe an
"event in all its motivations and consequences so purely that it has no
effect at all on his own subjectivity: it is analogous to that aesthetic
phenomenon of detachment from personal interest with which a
painter sees in a stormy landscape with thunder and lightning, or a
rolling sea, only the picture of them within him, the phenomenon of
complete absorption in the things themselves: it is a superstition,
however, that the picture which these things evoke in a man possessing
such a disposition is a true reproduction of the empirical nature of
the things themselves. Or is it supposed that at this moment the
things as it were engrave, counterfeit, photograph themselves by
their own action on a purely passive medium?
This would be mythology, and bad mythology at that: and it is
forgotten, moreover, that that moment is precisely the strongest and
most spontaneous moment of creation in the depths of the artist, a
moment of composition of the highest sort, the outcome of which
may be an artistically true painting but cannot be an historically true
one. To think of history objectively in this fashion is the silent work
of the dramatist; that is to say, to think of all things in relation to all
others and to weave the isolated event into the whole: always with the
presupposition that if a unity of plan does not already reside in
things it must be implanted into them. Thus man spins his web over
the past and subdues it, thus he gives expression to his artistic drive­
but not to his drive towards truth or justice. Objectivity and justice
have nothing to do with one another. A historiography could be
imagined which had in it not a drop of common empirical truth and
yet could lay claim to the highest degree of objectivity. Indeed,
Grillparzer ventures to declare: 'What is history but the way in which
the spirit of man apprehends events impenetrable to him; unites things
when God alone knows whether they belong together; substitutes
something comprehensible for what is incomprehensible; imposes
his concept of purpose from without upon a whole which, if it
possesses a purpose, does so only inherently; and assumes the
operation of chance where a thousand little causes have been at
work. All human beings have at the same time their own individual
necessity, so that millions of courses run parallel beside one another
in straight or crooked lines, frustrate or advance one another, strive
9 1
fOIwards or backwards, and thus assume for one anothĊr the character
of chance, and so, quite apart from the influence of the occurrences
of nature, make it impossible to establish any all-embracing
necessity prevailing throughout all events.' But it is exactly this kind
of necessity that is supposed to be brought to light as the result of
that 'objective' view of things! This is a presupposition which, if
enunciated by an historian as an article of faith, would assume a very
strange shape; Schiller is quite clear as to the purely subjective
nature of this assumption when he says of the historian: 'one
phenomenon after another begins to forsake the realm of blind
chance and limitless freedom and to take its place as a fitting member
of a harmonious whole - which whole is, of course, present only in his
imagination', But what is one to make of this assertion, hovering as it
does between tautology and nonsense, by one celebrated historical
virtuoso: 'the fact of the matter is that all human actions are subject
to the mighty and irresistible direction of the course of things,
though it may often not be apparent'? Such a proposition is not, as it
might perhaps seem, enigmatic wisdom in the' shape of plain
foolishness, as when Goethe's court gardener says 'Nature may let
itself be forced but it cannot be compelled', or in the fairground
placard reported by Swift: 'Here can be seen the biggest elephant in
the world except itself.' For how are human actions and the course of
things to be distinguished from one another? It seems to me in
general that historians such as the one we have just quoted cease to
instruct as soon as they begin to generalize and then reveal the weak­
ness they feel in the dark obscurities they employ, In other sciences
the generalizations are the most important thing, inasmuch as they
contain the laws: but if such propositions as that quoted are intended
to count as laws, then one must object that in that case the work of
the historiographer is wasted; for whatever truth remains in such
propositions after the obscurities referred to have been removed is
something completely familiar and even trivial; for it will be obvious
to everyone through every kind of experience down to the very
smallest. To incommode whole nations and expend years of
wearisome toil on it, however, is merely to pile experiment upon
experiment long after the law intended to be extracted from them
has been amply demonstrated: a senseless excess of experimen­
tation which has in fact plagued the natural sciences since the time of
Zollner. If the value of a drama lay solely in its conclusion, the drama
itself would be merely the most wearisome and indirect way possible
of reaching this goal; and so I hope that the significance of history
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
will not be thought to lie in its general propositions, as if these were
the flower and fruit of the whole endeavour, but that its value will be
seen to consist in its taking a familiar, perhaps commonplace theme,
an everyday melody, and composing inspired variations on it,
enhancing it, elevating it to a comprehensive symbol; and thus dis­
closing in the original theme a whole world of profundity, power
and beauty.
For this, however, there is required above all great artistic facility,
creative vision, loving absorption in the empirical data, the capacity
to imagine the further development of a given type - in any event,
objectivity is required, but as a positive quality. So often objectivity is
only a phrase. Instead of the outwardly tranquil but inwardly flashing
eye of the artist there is the affectation of tranquillity; just as a lack of
feeling and moral strength is accustomed to disguise itself as incisive
coldness and detachment. In certain cases banality of ideas, the
everyday wisdom which seems calm and tranquil only because it is
tedious, ventures to pose as that artistic condition in which the subject
becomes silent and wholly imperceptible. What is then preferred is
that which produces no emotion at all and the driest phrase is the
right phrase. One goes so far, indeed, as to believe that he to whom a
moment of the past means nothing at all is the proper man to describe
it. This is frequently the relationship between classicists and the
Greeks they study: . they mean nothing to one another - a state of
affairs called 'objectivity'! It is precisely where the highest and rarest
is to be represented that this ostentatious indifference becomes most
infuriating - for it is the vanity of the historian which is responsible
for it. Such authors incline one to agree with the proposition that a
man possesses vanity to the degree that he lacks understanding. No,
at any rate be honest! Do not seek the appearance of justice if you are
not called to the dreadful vocation of the just man. As though it were
the task of every age to have to be just towards everything that has
ever existed! It could even be said that ages and generations never do
have the · right to judge previous ages and generations: such an
uncomfortable mission falls only to individuals, and these of the
rarest kind. Who compels you to judge? And, moreover
test your­
self to see whether you could be just if you wanted to be! As judge,
you must stand higher than he who is to be judged; whereas all you
are is subsequent to him. The guests who come last to table have to
be content with the last places: and do you want the first? Then at
least perform some high and great deed; perhaps then they really
will make room for you, even if you do come last.
If you are to venture to interpret the past you can do so oÁly out of the fullest
exertion of the vigour of the present: only when you put forth your noblest
qualities in all their strength will you divine what is worth knowing
and preserving in the past. Like to like! Otherwise you will draw the
past down to you. Do not believe historiography that does not spring
from the head of the rarest minds; and you will know the quality of a
mind when it is obliged to express something universal or to repeat
something universally known: the genuine historian must possess
the power to remint the universally known into something never
heard of before, and to express the universal so simply and profoundly
that the simplicity is lost in the profundity and the profundity in the
simplicity. No one can be a great historian, an artist and a shallow­
pate at the same time: on the other hand, one should not underrate
the workmen who sift and carry merely because they can certainly
never become great historians; but even less should one confuse
them with them, but regard them rather as the necessary apprentices
and handymen in the service of the master: much as the French
used, with greater naivety than is posiible to a German, to speak of
the historiens de M. Thiers. These workmen are gradually to become
great scholars, but cannot for that reason ever be masters. A great
scholar and a great shallowpate
these two go rather better under
one hat.
To sum up: history is written by the experienced and superior
man. He who has not experienced greater and more exalted things
than others will not know how to interpret the great and exalted
things of the past. When the past speaks it always speaks as an oracle:
only if you are an architect of the future and know the present will
you understand it. The extraordinary degree and extent of the
influence exercised by Delphi is nowadays explained principally by
the fact that the Delphic priests had an exact knowledge of the past;
now it would be right to say that only he who constructs the future
has a righ t to judge the past. If you look ahead and set yourself a great
goal, you at the same time restrain that rank analytical impulse
which makes the present into a desert and all tranquillity, all peaceful
growth and maturing almost impossible. Draw about yourself the
fence of a great and comprehensive hope, of a hope-filled striving.
Form within yourself an image to which the future shall correspond,
and forget the superstition that you are epigones. You will have
enough to ponder and to invent when you reflect on the life of the
future; but do not ask of history that it should show you the How?
and the Wherewith? to this life. If, on the other hand, you acquire a
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
living knowledge of the history of great men, you will learn from it a
supreme commandment: to become mature and to flee from that
paralyzing upbringing of the present age which sees its advantage in
preventing your growth so as to rule and exploit you to the full while
you are still immature. And if you want biographies, do hot desire
those which bear the legend ' Herr So-and-So and his age', but those
upon whose title-page there would stand 'a fighter against his age'.
Satiate your soul with Plutarch and when you believe in his heroes
dare at the same time to believe in yourself. With a hundred such
men - raised in this unmodern way, that is to say become mature
and accustomed to the heroic - the whole noisy sham-culture of our
age could now be silenced for ever. -
When the historical sense reigns without restraint, and all its conse­
quences are realized, it uproots the future because it destroys illu­
sions and robs the things that exist of the atmosphere in which alone
they can live. Historical justice, even when it is genuine and practised
with the purest of intentions, is therefore a dreadful virtue because it
always undermines the living thing and brings it down: its judgment
is always annihilating. If the historical drive does not also contain a
drive to construct, if the purpose of destroying and,clearing is not to
allow a future already alive in anticipation to raise its house on the
ground thus liberated, if justice alone prevails, then the instinct for
creation will be enfeebled and discouraged. A religion, for example,
which is intended to be transformed into historical knowledge
under the hegemony of pure historical justice, a religion which is
intended to be understood through and through as an object of
science and learning, will when this process is at an end also be
found to have been destroyed. The reason is that historical verifi­
cation always brings to light so much that is false, crude, inhuman,
absurd, violent that the mood of pious illusion in which alone any­
thing that wants to live can live necessarily crumbles away: for it is
only in love, only when shaded by the illusion produced by love, that
is to say in the unconditional faith in right and perfection, that man is
creative. Anything that constrains a man to love less than uncon­
ditionally has severed the roots of his strength: he will wither away,
that is to say become dishonest. In producing this effect, history is
the antithesis of art: and only if history can endure to be transformed
into a work of art will it perhaps be able to preserve instincts or even
evoke them. Such a historiography would, however, be altogether
contrary to the analytical and inartistic tendencies of our time, which
would indeed declare it false. But a history which, lacking the direction
of an inner drive to construct, does nothing but destroy, in the long
run denaturizes its instruments: for such men destroy illusions and
'he who destroys the illusions in himself and others is punished by
nature, the cruellest tyrant'. For a good length of time, it is true, one
can occupy oneself with history in a perfectly innocent and harmless
way, as though it were merely an occupation like any other; recent
theology especially seems to have entered into partnership with his­
tory out of pure innocence, and even now it almost refuses to see
that, probably much against its will, it has thereby placed itself in the
service of the Voltairean ecrasez. * No one should suppose that this
development conceals a powerful new constructive instinct- unless,
that is, one is to regard the so-called Protestant Uriiont as the work of
a new religion, and perhaps the jurist Holtzendorf (the editor and
prefacer of the even more problematical Protestant Bible) as John
the Baptist at the river Jordan. For som,e time yet the Hegelian
philosophy still smouldering in older heads may assist in propagating
this innocence, perhaps by teaching one how to distinguish the ' idea
of Christianity' from its manifold imperfect 'phenomenal forms'
and even to convince oneself that it is the 'preferred tendency of the
idea' to reveal itself in ever purer forms, and at last in its purest, most
transparent, indeed hardly visible form, in the brains of the con­
temporary theologus liberalis vulgaris. But when he hears these purest­
of-the-pure Christians speaking of earlier impure Christians the
impartial auditor often has the impression that what is being spoken
of is not Christianity at all but - well, what are we to think? When we
find the ƕgreatest theologian of the century':!: characterizing Chris­
tianity as the religion which can 'discover itself in all existing and in
several other barely possible religions', and when the 'true church' is
supposed to be that which 'becomes a flowing mass, where there are
no contours, where every part is now here, now there, and every­
thing blends peacefully together' - again, what are we to think?
What one can learn in the case of Christianity
that under the
influence of a historical treatment it has become denaturized, until a
'*'Voltairean ecrasez.': alludes to Voltaire's motto 'ecrasez l'infame!' - destroy the
infamous thing (i.e. the C hurch).
tProtestant Union: the military alliance formed between 1 608 and 1 621 by the
Protestant princes of Germany.
:j:'greatest theologian of the century': Schleiermacher (see glossary).
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
completely historical, that is to say just treatment resolves it into
pure knowledge about Christianity and thereby destroys it - can be
studied in everything else that possesses life: that it ceases to live
when it is dissected completely, and lives a painful and morbid life
when one begins to practise historical dissection upon it. There are
people who believe that German music could have a transforming
and reforming effect on the Germans: they are angered, and con­
sider it an injustice against the most vigorous part of our culture,
when they see such men as Mozart and Beethoven already engulfed
by all the learned dust of biography and compelled by the torture­
instruments of historical criticism to answer a thousand impertinent
questions. Does it not mean its premature death, or at least paralysis,
when that, the living effects of which are not yet exhausted, is subjected
to curious investigation of the countless minutiae of its life and
works, and when problems of knowledge are sought where one
ought to learn to live and forget all problems? Imagine a couple of
these modern biographers transported to the birthplace of Chris­
tianity or of the Lutheran Reformation; their sober, pragmatic
curiosity would have exactly sufficed to render any actio in distans
impossible: just as the most wretched little animal can prevent the
mightiest oak-tree from coming into existence by eating the acorn.
All living things require an atmosphere around them, a mysterious
misty vapour; if they are deprived of this envelope, if a religion, an
art, a genius is condemned to revolve as a star without atmosphere,
we should no longer be surprised if they quickly wither and grow
hard and unfruitfuL It is the same with all great things, 'which never
succeed without some illusion', as Hans Sachs says in the
Meistersinger .
But every nation, too, indeed every human being that wants to
become mature requires a similar enveloping illusion, a similar pro­
tective and veiling cloud; nowadays, however, maturity as such is
hated because history is held in greater honour than life. There is,
indeed, rejoicing that now 'science is beginning to dominate life':
that condition may, possibly, be attained; but life thus dominated is
not of much value because it is far less living and guarantees far less
life for the future than did a former life dominated not by knowledge
but by instinct and powerful illusions. But the present age is, as
aforesaid, supposed to be an age, not of whole, mature and har­
monious personalities, but of labour of the greatest possible common
utility. That means, however, that men have to be adjusted to the
purposes of the age so as to be ready for employment as soon as
possible: they must labour in the factories of the gener3.J. good before
they are mature, indeed so that they shall not become mature for
this would be a luxury which would deprive the 'labour market' of a
greaLdeal of its workforce. Some birds are blinded so that they may
sing more beautifully; I do not think the men of today sing more
beautifully than their grandfathers, but I know they have been blinded.
The means, the infamous means used to blind them, however, is too
bright, too sudden, too varying light. The young man is swept along
through all the millennia: youths who understand nothing of war,
diplomatic action, commercial policy are thought fit to be
introduced to political history. But as the youth races through his­
tory, so do we modern men race through art galleries and listen to
concerts. We feel that one thing sounds different from another, that
one thi,!g produces a different effect from another: increasingly to
lose this sense of strangeness, no longer to be very much surprised at
anything, finally to be pleased with everything - that is then no
doubt called the historical sense, historical culture. To speak without
euphemism: the mass of the influx is so,great, the strange, barbaric
and violent things that press upon the youthful soul do so with such
overwhelming power that its only refuge is in an intentional
stupidity. Where there has been a stronger and more subtle aware­
ness, another emotion has no doubt also appeared: disgust. The
young man has become so homeless and doubts all concepts and all
customs. He now knows: every age is different, it does not matter
what you are like. In melancholy indifference he lets opinion after
opinion pass him by and he understands how HOlderlin felt when he
read Diogenes Laertius on the lives and teachings of the Greek
philosophers: 'I have again found here what I have often before dis­
covered, that the transitoriness and changeableness of human
thoughts and systems strike me as being almost more tragic than the
destinies which alone are usually called real.' No, to be so
overwhelmed and bewildered by history is, as the ancients
demonstrate, not at all necessary for youth, but in the highest degree
dangerous to it, as the moderns demonstrate. But now notice the
actual student of history, the heir of an enfeeblement already visible
almost before he has ceased to be a boy. He has acquired the
'methods' for doing work of his own, the right technique and the
noble bearing of the master; a wholly isolated little chapter of the
past has fallen victim to his astuteness and the methods he has
learned; he has already produced, indeed to use a prouder word, he
has 'created' something, he has now become an active servant of
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
truth and a lord in the universal empire of history. If already as a boy
he was 'ripe', now he is over-ripe: one needs only to shake him and
wisdom comes clattering down into one's lap; but the wisdom is rotten
and there is a worm in every apple. Believe me: if men are to labour
and be useful in the factory of science before they are mature,
science will soon be ruined just as effectively as the slaves th us
employed too early. I regret the need to make use of the jargon of the
slave-owner and employer of labour to describe things which in
themselves ought to be thought of as free of utility and raised above
the necessities oflife; but the words 'factory', 'labour market', 'supply',
'making profitable', and whatever auxiliary verbs egoism now
employs, come unbidden to the lips when one wishes to describe the
most recent generation of men of learning. Sterling mediocrity
grows even more mediocre, science ever more profitable in the
economic sense. Actually our most recent men of learning are wise
on one point, and on that they are, I admit, wiser than anyone has
ever been, but on all other points they are infinitely different - to use
a cautious expression - from any man of learning of the old stamp.
This notwithstanding, they demand honours and advantages for
themselves, as though the state and public opinion were duty bound
to accept the new coins as being of equal value to the old. The carters
have made a contract with one another and by restamping them­
selves as geniuses have decreed that genius is superfluous; probably
a later age will see that their buildings are carted together, not con­
structed. Those who unwearyingly repeat the modern call to battle
and sacrifice 'Division of labour! Fall in!' must for once be told in
round and plain terms: if you want to push science forward as quickly
as possible you will succeed in destroying it as quickly as possible;
just as a hen perishes ifit is compelled to lay eggs too quickly. Science
has certainly been pushed forward at an astonishing speed over the
past decades: but just look at the men of learning, the exhausted
hens. They are in truth not ' harmonious' natures; they can only cackle
more than ever because they lay eggs more often: though the eggs, to
be sure, have got smaller and smaller (though the books have got
thicker and thicker) . As the final and most natural outcome we have
the universally admired 'popularization' (together with 'feminization'
and 'infantization') of science, that is to say the infamous trimming
of the coat of science to fit the body of the 'general public' - to
employ a cutting expression for an activity suited to tailors. Goethe
saw this as a misuse of science and demanded that the sciences
should affect the outside world only through enhanced practical
application. The older generation of men of learning, moreover, had
-good grounds for regarding such a misuse as difficult and burden­
some: it is on equally good grounds that the younger generation
finds it easy, for, except in the case of a tiny corner of knowledge,
they themselves are very much 'general public' and share its needs.
They have only to sit at their ease for once and they are able to open
to the curiosity of this general populace even the little realm of their
own special study. This relaxation is afterwards called 'the man of
learning modestly condescending to his people': while in reality the
man oflearning has, to the extent that he is not a man oflearning but
one of the mob, descended only to his own level. Create for your­
selves the concept of a 'people': it could never be too exalted or too
noble a concept. If you thought well of the people you would show
them compassion and would guard against offering them your his­
torical aqua fortis as a refreshing draught of life. But in your hearts
you despise them, for you cannot bring yourself seriously to care
about their future, and your behaviour is that of practical pessimists,
by which I mean men directed by a prejentiment of coming disaster
and therefore sluggishly indifferent to the wellbeing of others and to
your own as well. If only the ground will go on bearing us! And if it
ceases to bear us, that too is very well: - that is their feeling and thus
they live an ironic existence.
It may seem strange, though it ought not to seem self-contradictory,
when I ascribe a kind of ironic self-awareness to an age accustomed to
break into such loud and innocent rejoicing at its historical culture,
and say that it is infused with a presentiment that there is really nothing
to rejoice about and a fear that all the merriment of historical
knowledge will soon be over and done with. Goethe presented to us
a comparable enigma in regard to the individual personality in his
noteworthy account of Newton: he discovers at the foundation (or,
more correctly, at the highest point) of his being 'a troubled
presentiment that he is in error', the momentary expression, as it
were, of a superior consciousness that has attained to a certain ironical
overview of his inherent nature. So it is that we find in precisely the
greatest and more highly developed historical men a suppressed
consciousness, often amounting to a general scepticism, of how
great an absurdity and superstition it is to believe that the education
of a nation has to be as preponderantly historical as it is now; for pre-
1 00
On the uses and disadvantages of history for lift
cisely the most vigorous nations, vigorous in deeds and works, lived
differently from this and raised their children differently. But that
absurdity and superstition is suited to us - so runs the sceptical
objection - to us, the latecomers, the last pale offspring of mightier
and happier races, to us who are the fulfilment of Hesiod's prophesy
that men would one day be born already grey-haired an4 that as
soon as he saw that sign Zeus would eradicate this race. Historical
culture is indeed a kind of inborn grey-hairedness, and those who
bear its mark from childhood must instinctively believe in the old age
of mankind: to age, however, there pertains an appropriate senile
occupation, that of looking back, of reckoning up, of closing
accounts, of seeking consolation through remembering what has
been, in short historical culture. But the human race is a tough and
persistent thing and will not permit its progress - fOIwards or back­
wards - to be viewed in terms of millennia, or indeed hardly in terms
of hundreds of millennia; that is to say, it will not be viewed as a
whole at all by thar infinitesimal atom, the individual man. What is
there in a couple of thousand years (or in other words the space of 34
consecutive generations of 60 years each) which permits us to speak
of the 'youth' of mankind at the beginning and the 'old age' of man­
kind at the end? Is there not concealed in this paralysing belief that
humanity is already declining a misunderstanding of a Christian
theological idea inherited from the Middle Ages, the idea that the
end of the world is coming, that we are fearfully awaiting the Last
Judgment? Is the increasing need for historical judgment not that
same idea in a new dress, as though our age, being the ultimate age,
were empowered to exercise over all the past that universal judg­
ment which Christian belief never supposed would be pronounced
by men but by 'the Son of Man'? In earlier times this 'memento mori'
addressed to mankind as a whole as well as to individual men was an
ever-painful goad and as it were the high point of medieval learning
and conscience. Its modern antithesis, 'memento vivere', is, to speak
frankly, still a somewhat modest little sound rather than a full­
throated one, and has something almost dishonest about it. For
mankind continues to treasure its memento mori and reveals the fact
through its universal need for history: knowledge, its mightiest wing­
beats notwithstanding, has not been able to soar aloft, a profound
sense of hopelessness remains and has assumed that historical
colouring with which all higher education and culture is now sad­
dened and darkened. A religion which of all the hours of a man's life
holds the last to be the most important, which prophesies an end to
1 0 1
I
all life on earth and condemns all who live to live in the fifth act of a
tragedy, may well call forth the profoundest and noblest powers, but
it is inimical to all new planting, bold experimentation, free aspir­
ation; it resists all flight into the unknown because it loves and hopes
for nothing there: it allows what is becoming to force its way up only
with reluctance, and then when the time is ripe it sacrifices it or sets it
aside as a seducer to existence, as a liar as to the value of existence.
What the Florentines did when, under the influence of Savonarola's
preaching, they made that celebrated holocaust of paintings,
manuscripts, mirrors and masks, Christianity would like to do to
every culture which stimulates continued striving and bears that
memento vivere as its motto; and if it proves impossible to do this in a
blunt and direct manner, that is to say by force, it nonetheless
achieves its aim by allying itself with historical culture, usually
without the latter'S knowledge moreover, and speaking henceforth
through its mouth rejects with a shrug everything still coming into
being and smothers it in the awareness of being a latecomer and
epigone, in short of being born grey-haire8. Austere and profoundly
serious reflection on the worthlessness of all that has occurred, on
the ripeness of the world for judgment, is dissipated into the sceptical .
attitude that it is at any rate as well to know about all that has
occurred, since it is too late to do anything better. Thus the historical
sense makes its servants passive and retrospective; and almost the
only time the sufferer from the fever of history becomes active is
when this sense is in abeyance through momentary forgetfulness -
. though even then, as soon as the act is finished he at once dissects it,
prevents it from producing any further effects by analysing it, and
finally skins it for the purpose of 'historical study'. In this sense we
are still living in the Middle Ages and history is still disguised theology:
just as the reverence with which the unlearned laity treat the learned \
class is inherited from the reverence with which it treated the clergy.
What one formerly gave to the church one now gives, though more
sparingly, to learning: but that one gives at all is an effect of the
church's former influence - the modern spirit, as is well known, is
somewhat niggardly and unskilled in the noble virtue of generosity.
Perhaps this observation will not be very acceptable, perhaps as
unacceptable as my derivation of our excess of history from the
medieval memento mori and the hopelessness in regard to all coming
ages of human existence which Christianity bears in its heart. If so,
you might try to replace this explanation, which I offer only with
some hesitation, with a better one; for the origin of historical culture
On the uses and disadvantages of history for lift
- its quite radical conflict with the spirit of any 'new age', any 'modem
awareness' - this origin must itself be known historically, historymust
itself resolve the problem of history, knowledge must turn its sting
against itself - this threefold must is the imperative of the 'new age',
supposing this age really does contain anything new, powerful,
original and promising more life. Or is it actually the case that we
Germans
to leave the Romance nations out of account - must
always be no more than 'heirs' in all the higher affairs of culture,
because that is all we can ever be; a proposition once memorably
expressed by Wilhelm Wackernagel: 'We Germans are a nation of
heirs, with all our higher knowledge, even with our beliefs, no more
than heirs of the world of antiquity; even those hostile to it con­
tinually breathe the immortal spirit of classical culture beside the
spirit of Christianity, and if anyone succeeded in excluding these two
elements from the atmosphere which surrounds the inner world of
man there would not be much left to prolong a life of the spirit.' And
even if we Germans were really no more than heirs - to be able to
look upon such a culture as that as our rightful inheritance would
make the appellation 'heirs' the greatest and proudest possible: yet
we would nonetheless be obliged to ask whether it really was our
eternal destiny to be pupils of declining antiquity: at some time or other
we might be permitted gradually to set our goal higher and more dis­
tant, some time or other we ought to be allowed to claim credit for
having developed the spirit of Alexandrian-Roman culture so nobly
and fruitfully
among other means through our universal history ­
that we might now as a reward be permitted to set ourselves the even
mightier task of striving to get behind and beyond this Alexandrian
world and boldly to seek our models in the original ancient Greek
world of greatness, naturalness and humanity. But there we also dis­
cover the reality of an essentially unhistorical culture and one which is nonethe­
less, or rather on that account, an inexpressibly richer and more vital culture.
Even if we Germans were in fact nothing but successors
we could
not be anything greater or prouder than successors if we had
appropriated such a culture and were the heirs and successors of
that.
What I mean by this
and it is all I mean
is that the thought of
being epigones, which can often be a painful thought, is also capable
of evoking great effects and grand hopes for the future in both an
individual and in a nation, provided we regard ourselves as the heirs
and successors of the astonishing powers of antiquity and see in this
our honour and our spur. What I do not mean, therefore, is that we
1 03
should live as pale and stunted late descendants
"
of strong races
coldly prolonging their life as antiquarians and gravediggers. Late
descendants of that sort do indeed live an ironic existence: annihil­
ation follows at the heels of the limping gait of their life; they shudder
at it when they rejoice in the past, for they are embodied memory yet
their remembrance is meaningless if they have no heirs. Thus they
are seized by the troubled presentiment that their life is an injustice,
since there will be no future life to justify it.
But suppose we imagine these antiquarian latecomers suddenly
exchanging this painfully ironic modesty for a state of shameless­
ness; suppose we imagine them announcing in shrill tones: the race
is now at its zenith, for only now does it possess knowledge of itself,
only now has it revealed itself to itself - we should then behold a
spectacle through which, as in a parable, the enigmatic significance
for German culture of a certain very celebrated philosophy would be
unriddled. I believe there has been no dangerous vacillation or crisis
of German culture this century that has not been rendered more
dangerous by the enormous and stillocontinuing influence of this
philosophy, the Hegelian. The belief that one is a latecomer of the
ages is, in any case, paralysing and depressing: but it must appear
dreadful and devastating when such a belief one day by a bold in­
version raises this latecomer to godhood as the true meaning and
goal of all previous events, when his miserable condition is equated
with a completion of world-history. Such a point of view has accus­
tomed the Germans to talk of a 'world-process' and to justify their
own age as the necessary result of this world-process; such a point of
view has set history, insofar as history is 'the concept that realizes
itself', 'the dialectics of the spirit of the peoples' and the · 'world­
tribunal', in place of the other spiritual powers, art and religion, as
the sole sovereign power.
History understood in this Hegelian fashion has been mockingly
called God's sojourn on earth, though the god referred to has
been created only by history. This god, however, became transpar­
ent and comprehensible to himself within the Hegelian craniums
and has already ascended all the dialectically possible steps of his
evolution up to this self-revelation: so that for Hegel the climax
and terminus of the world-process coincided with his own exis­
tence in Berlin. Indeed, he ought to have said that everything that
came after him was properly to be considered merely as a musical
coda to the world-historical rondo or, even more properly, as super­
fluous. He did not say it: instead he implanted into the gener-
1 04
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
ation thoroughly leavened by him that admiration for the 'power of
history' which in practice transforms every moment into a naked
admiration for success and leads to an idolatry of the factual: which
idolatry is now generally described by the very mythological yet
quite idiomatic expression 'to accommodate oneself to the facts'.
But he who has once learned to bend his back and bow his head
before the 'power of history' at last nods 'Yes' like a Chinese
mechanical doll to every power, whether it be a government or
public opinion or a numerical majority, and moves his limbs to the
precise rhythm at which any 'power' whatever pulls the strings. If
every success is a rational necessity, ifevery event is a victory of the
logical or the 'idea' - then down on your knees quickly and do
reverence to the whole stepladder of 'success'! What, are there no
longer any living mythologies? What, the religions are dying out?
Just behold the religion of the power of history, regard the priests of
the mythology of the idea and their battered knees! Is it too much to
say that all the virtues now attend on this new faith ? Or is 'it not
selflessness when the historical man lets himself be emptied until he
is no more than an objective sheet of plate glass? Is it not
magnanimity when, by worshipping in every force the force itself,
one renounces all force of one's own in Heaven and upon earth? Is it
not justice always to hold the scales of the powers in one's hands and
to watch carefully to see which tends to be the stronger and heavier?
And what a school of decorum is such a way of contemplating his­
tory! To take everything objectively, to grow angry at nothing, to love
nothing, to understand everything, how soft and pliable that makes
one; and even if someone raised in this school should for once get
publicly angry, that is still cause for rejoicing, for one realizes it is
intended only for artistic effect, it is ira and studium and yet altogether
sine ira et studio.:';
How obsolete and old-fashioned my objections to this complex of
mythology and virtue are! But I must out with them, even though
they excite laughter. I would say therefore: history always inculcates:
'there was once', morality: 'you ought not to' or 'you ought not to
have'. Thus history amounts to a compendium of factual immorality.
How far astray he would go who regarded history as being at the
same time the judge of this factual immorality! Morality is offended,
for example, by the fact that a Raphael had to die at thirty-six: such a
being ought not to die. If, in the face of this, you wanted to come to
"Tacitus described his own manner of writing history as 'sina ira et studio' ('with­
out anger and without partisan zeal'). Studium means 'course of study'.
1 05
the aid of history as apologists of the factual, you would say: he had
expressed everything that was in him, had he lived longer he would
have produced only a repetition of the beauty he had created
already, and so forth. In that way you become Devil's advocates: you ·
make success, the factual, into your idol, while in reality the factual is
always stupid and has at all times resembled a calf rather than a god.
As apologists of history you have, moreover, ignorance as a prompter:
for it is only because you do not know what such a natura naturans* as
Raphael is that you are not incensed to know that it once was but will
never be again. We have recently been informed that, with his
eighty-two years, Goethe outlived himself: yet I would gladly
exchange a couple of Goethe's 'outlived' years for whole cartloads of
fresh modern lifetimes, so as to participate in such conversations as
Goethe conducted with Eckermann and thus be preserved from all
and any up-to-date instruction from the legionaries of the moment.
In relation to such dead men, how few of the living have a right to
live at all! That the many are alive and those few live no longer is
nothing but a brute truth, that is to saƖan incorrigible stupidity, a
blunt 'thus it is' in opposition to morality's 'it ought not to be thus'.
Yes, in opposition to morality! For speak of any virtue you will, of
justice, magnanimity, bravery, of the wisdom and sympathy of man
- in every case it becomes a virtue through rising against that blind
power of the factual and tyranny of the actual and by submitting to
laws that are not the laws of the fluctuations of history. It always
swims against the tide of history, whether by combating its passions
as the most immediate stupid fact of its existence or by dedicating
itself to truthfulness as falsehood spins its glittering web around it. If
history in general were nothing more than 'the world-system of passion
and error', mankind would have to read it as Goethe advised his
readers to read Werther: as if it called to them 'be a man and do not
follow after me!' Fortunately, however, it also preserves the memory
of the great fighters against history, that is to say against the blind
power of the actual, and puts itself in the pillory by exalting precisely
these men as the real historical natures who bothered little with the
'thus it is' so as to follow 'thus it shall be' with a more cheerful pride.
Not to bear their race to the grave, but to found a new generation of
this race - that is what impels them ceaselessly forward: and even if
they themselves are late-born - there is a way of living which will
*natura naturans: Spinoza's term for God under the aspect of creating nature, as
opposed to created nature - as the cause of all things.
1 06
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
make them forget it - coming generations will know them only as
first-born.
Is our age perhaps such a first-born? - The vehemence of its historical
sense is so great and is expressed in so universal and altogether
unrestrained a manner, that future ages will in fact count it a first­
born at any rate in this respect - assuming, that is, that there will be
any future ages in the cultural sense. But it is precisely this fact which
evokes in us a grave doubt. Close beside the pride of modern man
there stands his ironic view of himself, his awareness that he has to
live in an historicizing, as it were a twilight mood, his fear that his
youthful hopes and energy will not survive into the future. Here and
there one goes further, into cynicism, and justifies the course of his­
tory, indeed the entire evolution of the world, in a manner especially
adapted to the use of modern man, according to the cynical canon:
as things are they had to be, as men now are they were bound to
become, none may resist this inevitability. The pleasant feeling pro­
duced by this kind of cynicism is the refuge of him who cannot
endure the ironical state; and the last decade has, moreover, made
him a present of one of its fairest inventions, a full and rounded
phrase to describe this cynicism: it calls his way of living in the
fashion of the age and wholly without reflection 'the total surrender
of the personality to the world-process'. The personality and the
world-process! The world-process and the personality of the flea! If
only one were not compelled everlastingly to hear the hyperbole of
hyperboles, the word 'world, world, world' - when one ought more
honestly to speak of 'man, man, man'! Heirs of the Greeks and
Romans? of Christianity? To these cynics that seems nothing; but
heirs of the world-process! Summit and target of the world-process!
Meaning and solution of all the riddles of evolution come to light in
modern man, the ripest fruit of the tree of knowledge! - that I call an
ecstatic feeling of pride; it is by this sign that one can recognize the
first-born of all ages, even though they may have also come last.
Contemplation of history has never flown so far, not even in dreams;
for now the history of mankind is only the continuation of the history
of animals and plants; even in the profoundest depths of the sea the
universal historian still finds traces of himself as living slime; gazing
in amazement, as at a miracle, at the tremendous course mankind
has already run, his gaze trembles at that even more astonishing
miracle, modern man himself, who is capable of surveying this
course. He stands high and proud upon the pyramid Nf the world­
process; as he lays the keystone of his knowledge at the top of it he
seems to call out to nature all around him: 'We have reached the
goal, we are the goal, we are nature perfected.'
Overproud European of the nineteenth century, you are raving!
Your knowledge does not perfect nature, it only destroys your own
nature. Compare for once the heights of your capacity for
knowledge with the depths of your incapacity for action. It is true
you climb upon the sunbeams of knowledge up to Heaven, but you
also climb down to chaos. Your manner of moving, that of climbing
upon knowledge, is your fatality; the ground sinks away from you
into the unknown; there is no longer any support for your life, only
spider's threads which every new grasp of knowledge tears apart. -
But enough of this seriousness, since it is also possible to view the
matter' more cheerfully.
The madly thoughtless shattering and dismantling of all foun­
dations, their dissolution into a continual evolving that flows
ceaselessly away, the tireless unspinning and historicizing of all
there has ever been by modern man, the great cross-spider at the
node of the cosmic web - all this may concern and dismay moralists,
artists, the pious, even statesmen; we shall for once let it cheer us by
looking at it in the glittering magic mirror of a philosophical parodist in
whose head the age has come to an ironical awareness of itself, and
has done so with a clarity which (to speak Goethean) 'amounts to
infamy'. Hegel once taught us: 'when the spirit changes direction, we
philosophers too are there': our age changed direction, to self-irony,
and behold! E. von Hartmann too was there and indited his cele­
brated philosophy of the unconscious, or - to speak more clearly -
his philosophy of unconscious irony. We have seldom read a
merrier invention or a more philosophical piece of roguery than
this of Hartmann; whoever is not enlightened by it as to the nature
of becoming, whoever is not inwardly cleared out and set in order,
indeed,. in regard to that matter, is truly ripe and ready for becom­
ing a has-been. The beginning and goal of the world-process,
from the first stab of consciousness to i ts being hurled back into
nothingness, together with an exact description of the task of our
generation within this world-process, all presented direct from
that cleverly discovered well of inspiration, the unconscious, and
gleaming with apocalyptic light, all so deceptively mimicking
straight-faced earnestness as though it were a genuine serious phil­
osophy and not only ajoke philosophy
such a production marks
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
its creator as one of the first philosophical parodists of all time; let
us therefore sacrifice on his altar, let us sacrifice to him, the dis­
coverer of a true universal medicine, a lock of hair - to steal one
of Schleiermacher's terms for expressing admiration. For what
medicine could be more efficacious against excess of historical
culture than Hartmann's parody of world-history?
Expressed without the rhetoric, what Hartmann proclaims to us
from the smokey tripod of unconscious irony amounts to this: he
tells us it would be quite sufficient, for our time to be exactly as it is,
to bring about, eventually, a condition in which people would find
this existence intolerable: which we truly believe. This dreadful
ossification of our age, this restless rattling of the bones - such as
David Strauss has naively described to us as the fairest factuality - is
justified by Hartmann, not only from behind, ex causis efficientibus,
but even from in front, ex causa finali; the rogue illumines our age
with the light of the Last Day, and it turns out that our age is a very
fine one, especially for him who wants to suffer as acutely as possible
from the indigestibility of life and for whom therefore that Last Day
cannot come quickly enough. It is true that Hartmann calls the time
of life mankind is now approaching its 'years of manhood': but by
this he means the happy condition in which all that is left is 'solid
mediocrity', art is that which 'perhaps offers entertainment to the
Berlin businessman of an evening', in which 'the age no longer
requires genius, because it would mean casting pearls before swine
or because the age has advanced beyond the stage appropriate to
geniuses to a more important one' - to a stage of social evolution,
that is to say, at which every worker, 'having a workday which leaves
him adequate leisure for intellectual training, leads a comfortable
existence'. Rogue of rogues, you give voice to the longings of con­
temporary mankind: but you likewise know the spectre that will
stand at the end of these years of manhood as an outcome of that
intellectual training in solid mediocrity - disgust. Things are already
in a visibly sorry state, but they will get very much sorrier, 'the Anti­
Christ is visibly extending his influence wider and wider' - but that is
how it must be, that is what it must come to, for the road we have taken
can lead only to disgust with all existence. 'Let us therefore press the
world-process vigorously forward as workers in the vineyard of the
Lord, for it is the process alone that can lead to redemption!'
The vineyard of the Lord! The process! Redemption! Who cannot
see and hear in this how historical culture, which knows only the
word 'becoming', is here deliberately disguising itself as a parodistic
1 09
deformity, how from behind a grotesque mask it utters the most
mischievous nonsense about itself? For what does this last roguish
summons to the workers in the vineyard really demand of them?
What work are they to press vigorously forward? Or, to put the question
differently: what does the historically cultivated man, the modern
fanatic of the process swimming and drowning in the stream of
becoming, have left to do if he is one day to harvest that disgust we
have spoken of, the most exquisite grape of the vineyard? - He has to
do nothing but go on living as he has lived hitherto, go on loving
what he has loved hitherto, go on hating what he has hated hitherto,
and go on reading the newspapers he has read hitherto; for him
there is only one sin - to live differently from the way in which he has
hitherto lived. How he has hitherto lived, however, is recorded for
us in giant monumental characters on that celebrated page which
has sent the whole contemporary cultured rabble into ecstasies
because they see in them their own justification blazing forth in
apocalyptic light. For what the unconscious parodist demands of
each individual is 'the total surrender oɶthe personality to the world­
process for the sake of its goal, world-redemption'; or even more
clearly: 'affirmation of the will to live is proclaimed as for the present
the only right course; for only in a total surrender to life and its
sorrows, and not in a cowardly renunciation and withdrawal, is any­
thing to be achieved for the world-process', 'the striving for denial of
the individual will is as foolish and useless as, indeed even more
foolish than, suicide'. 'The thinking reader will understand without
further elucidation what shape a practical philosophy erected on
these principles would assume, and that such a philosophy can
embody, not a sundering from life, but only the fullest reconciliation
with it.'
The thoughtful reader will understand - as if anyone could mis­
understand Hartmann! And how unspeakably amusing it is that he
should be misunderstoodl Are the contemporary Germans a very
refined people? A worthy Englishman finds them lacking in 'deli­
cacy of perception', and ventures indeed to say: 'in the German mind
there does seem to be something splay, something blunt-edged,
unhandy and infelicitous' - would the great German parodist con­
tradict this? It is true that, according to him, we are approaching
'that ideal condition in which the human race creates its history
with full conscious awareness': but we are patently still far from
that perhaps even more ideal condition in which mankind can
read Hartmann's book with full conscious awareness. If they
ever do so, no man will ever again utter the words 'world-process'
1 10
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
without smiling; for they will call to mind the time when
Hartmann's parodistic gospel was listened to, absorbed, attacked,
revered, propagated and canonized with all the simple honesty
of the 'German mind', indeed with 'the wry earnestness of the
owl', as Goethe puts it. But the world must get on, that ideal
condition will not be created by dreaming, it must be fought and
struggled for, and the path to redemption from that owlish earnest­
ness lies only through cheerfulness. The time will come when one
will prudently refrain from all constructions of the world-process or
even of the history of man; a time when one will regard not the
masses but individuals, who form a kind of bridge across the tur­
bulent stream of becoming. These individuals do not carry forward
any kind of process but live contemporaneously with one another;
thanks to history, which permits such a collaboration, they live as
that republic of genius of which Schopenhauer once spoke; one
giant calls to another across the desert intervals of time and, undis­
turbed by the excited chattering dwarfs who creep about beneath
them, the exalted spirit-dialogue goes on. It is the task of history to
be the mediator between them and thus again and again to inspire
and lend the strength for the production of the great man. No,
the goal of humanity cannot lie in its end but only in its highest
exemplars.
Our comedian has, of course, a different point of view, and with
that admirable dialectic which is as genuine as its admirers are
admirable he tells us: 'The concept of evolution is not compatible
with ascribing to the world-process an infinite duration in the past,
since then every conceivable evolution must have already been run
through, which is not the case (oh rogue!); so likewise we cannot con­
cede to the process an infinite duration in the future; both would
annul the concept of evolution towards a goal (rogue again!) and
would make the world-process resemble the Danaides' water-jugs.
The complete victory of the logical over the illogical (oh rogue of
rogues!) must, however, coincide with the temporal end of the
world-process, the Last Day.' No, you alert and mocking spirit, as
long as the illogical reigns as it does today, as long, for example, as
one can speak of the 'world-process' as you speak of it and gain
universal applause, the Last Day is still far off: for it is still too cheerful
on this earth, many illusions still flourish, for example the illusion
your contemporaries harbour about you, we are not yet ready to be
hurled back into your nothingness: for we believe that it will be even
merrier here once people have begun to understand you, you mis­
understood reader of the unconscious. If, however, disgust should
nonetheless come with power, as you have prophesied to your
readers, if your account of your present and future should turn out
to be right and no one has despised them with such disgust as you
have - then I am quite willing to vote with the majority, in the form
proposed by you, that next Saturday night punctually at twelve
o'clock the world shall perish; and our decree shall conclude: from
tomorrow there shall be no more time and the newspapers shall
appear no more. But perhaps our decree will have no effect: in that
event, though, we shall at least have time to perfonn a fine experiment.
We shall take a pair of scales and place Hartmann's unconscious on
one of them and Hartmann's world-process on the other. There are
people who believe they will weigh exactly the same: for in each of
them there would lie an equally bad expression and an equally good
joke.
Once Hartmann's joke has been understood, Hartmann's
expression 'world-process' will be of no use except as a joke. It has,
in fact, for long been high time that the excesses of the historical sense,
the immoderate revelling in the process at the expense of being and
life, the senseless displacement of all perq:>ectives, were assaulted by
all the militia satirical malice can summon; and it shall always be said
in praise of the philosopher of the unconscious that he was the first
to feel how ludicrous the idea of the 'world-process' is and to make
others feel it even more strongly by the singular earnestness of his
presentation of it. To what end the 'world' exists, to what end 'man­
kind' exists, ought not to concern us at all for the moment except as
objects of humour: for the presumptuousness of the little human
worm is the funniest thing at present on the world's stage; on the
other hand, do ask yourself why you, the individual, exist, and if you
can get no other answer try for once to justify the meaning of
your existence as it were a posteriori by setting before yourself
an aim, a goal, a 'to this end', an exalted and noble 'to this
end'. Perish in pursuit of this and only this - I know of no better
aim of life than that of perishing, animae magnae prodigus, * in pur­
suit of the great and the impossible. If, on the other hand, the
doctrines of sovereign becoming, of the fluidity of all concepts,
types and species, of the lack of any cardinal distinction between
man and animal - doctrines which I consider true but deadly -
are thrust upon the people for another generation with the rage
for instruction that has by now become normal, no one should
be surprised if the people perishes of petty egoism, ossification
0:. 'prodigal of a great soul' (Horace, Odes I.xII.38), here employed in the sense
'careless of life'.
1 1 2
On the uses and disadvantages. of history for life
and greed, falls apart and ceases to be a people; in its place sys­
tems of individualist egoism, brotherhoods for the rapacious
exploitation of the non-brothers, and similar creations of utilitarian
vulgarity may perhaps appear in the arena of the future. To prepare
the way for these creations all one has to do is to go on writing history
from the standpoint of the masses and seeking to derive the laws
which govern it from the needs of these masses, that is to say from
the'laws which move the lowest mud- and clay-strata of society. The
masses seem to me to deserve notice in three respects only: first as
faded copies of great men produced on poor paper with worn-out
plates, then as a force of resistance to great men, finally as instruments
in the hands of great men; for the rest, let the Devil and statistics take
them! What, can statistics prove that there are laws in history? Laws?
They certainly prove how vulgar and nauseatingly uniform the masses
are: but are the effects of inertia, stupidity, mimicry, love and hunger
to be called laws? Well, let us suppose they are: that, however, only
goes to confirm the proposition that so far as there are l¤¥s in history
the laws are worthless and the history is also worthless. But the kind
of history at present universally prized is precisely the kind that takes
the great mass-drives for the chief and weightiest facts of history and
regards great men as being no more than their clearest expression,
as it were bubbles visible on the surface of the flood. Greatness is,
under this supposition, the product of the masses, which is to say
order is the product of chaos; and it is only natural that in the end the
hymn of praise is sung to the masses that produce it. That which has
moved these masses for any length of time and has become what is
called 'a power in history' is then accorded the name 'great' . But is
that not a quite deliberate confusion of quantity with quality? When
the rude masses have found some idea or other, a religious idea for
instance, to their liking, strenuously defended it and dragged it
along with them for centuries, then and only then is the inventor and
founder of this idea to be called great. But why! The noblest and
most exalted things make no effect whatever on the masses; the his­
torical success of Christianity, its power in history, its tenacity and
durability, happily proves nothing with respect to the greatness of its
founder, for if it did it would be evidence against him: between him
and that historical success there lies a very dark and earthy stratum of
passion, error, thirst for power and honour, of the continuing
strength of the imperium romanum, a stratum from which Christianity
acquired the earthly residue and taste which made possible its con­
tinuance in this world and bestowed upon it as it were its tenability.
Greatness ought not to depend on success: Demosthenes possessed
greatness though he had no success. The purest and truest adherents
of Christianity have always hindered and called into question its
worldly success and so-called 'power in history' rather than pro­
moted them; for they were accustomed to place themselves outside
the 'world' and had no regard for the 'process of the Christian idea';
for which reason they have as a rule remained wholly unknown and
anonymous to history. Expressed in Christian terms: the Devil is the
regent of this world and the lord of success and progress: in all the
powers in history he is the actual power, and that is essentially how it
will always remain - even though the fact may be painful to the ears
of an age accustomed to the idolization of success and power in history.
For it is an age that is practised in bestowing new names on things
and has even rebaptized the Devil. I t is indeed the hour of a great
peril: mankind seems near to discovering that the egoism of
individuals, groups or the masses has at all times been the lever of
the movements of history; at the same time, however, this discovery
has caused no perturbation of any kind, but on the contrary it has
now been decreed: egoism shall be our iod. In this new faith one is
now setting to work with the clearest deliberation to erect the history
of the future on the foundation of egoism: only it is to be a more pru­
dent egoism than heretofore, an egoism which imposes certain re'"
straints upon itself so as to ensure its endurance, an egoism which
studies history precisely so as to become acquainted with that earlier
imprudent egoism. In the course of this study it has been learned
that a quite special role in the founding of the world-system of
egoism devolves upon the state: it has to be the patron of all the prudent
ego isms so as to protect them with its military and police forces
against the terrifying outbreaks to which imprudent egoism is liable.
I t is to the same end that history - the evolutionary history of animal
and man - is carefully inculcated into the dangerous, because
imprudent, masses and working classes: one knows that a grain of
historical culture is capable of breaking down dull and rude instincts
and desires or of leading them into the path of a refined egoism. In
summa: mankind is now, in the words of E. von Hartmann, 'with a
thoughtful eye to the future taking into consideration a practical
domestic establishment in the earthly homeland'. The same writer
calls this period the 'manhood of mankind', and thereby mocks at
that which is now called 'man' as though what is understood by this
word were simply the sober self-seeker; just as he likewise proph­
esies an old-age to follow this period of manhood, though again he
clearly means only to mock at our contemporary grey-beards: for he
1 1 4
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
speaks of the mature contemplativeness with which they 'review all
the dissolute sufferings of their life's course and grasp how vain were
the goals for which they had hitherto supposed they were striving' .
No, a manhood of cunning and historically cultivated egoism is
followed by an old-age which clings to life with repulsive greed and
lack of dignity, and then by a final act in which the
Last scene of all,
That ends this strange, eventful history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing. *
Whether our lives and culture are threatened by these dissolute,
toothless and tasteless greybeards or by Hartmann's so-called 'men',
let us in the face of both of them hold on with our teeth to the rights
of our youth and never weary in our youth of defending the future
against these iconoclasts who would wreck it. In this struggle,
however, we shall have to discover a particularly unpleasant fact: that
the excesses of the historical sense from which the present day suffers are
deliberately furthered, encouraged and - employed.
They are employed, however, against youth, so as to train them
up to that mature manhood which is striven for everywhere; they
are employed to combat the natural aversion of youth to such
manly-unmanly egoism by transfiguring the latter in the magic
light of science. We know, indeed, what history can do when it
gains a certain ascendancy, we know it only too well: it can cut
off the strongest instincts of youth, its fire, defiance, unselfishness
and love, at the roots, damp down the heat of its sense of
justice, suppress or regress its desire to mature slowly with the
counter-desire to be ready, useful, fruitful as quickly as possible,
cast morbid doubt on its honesty and boldness of feeling; indeed,
it can even deprive youth of its fairest privilege, of its power to
implant in itself the belief in a great idea and then let it grow to
an even greater one. A certain excess of history can do all this, w.e
have seen it do it: and it does it by continually shifting horizons
and removing a protective atmosphere and thus preventing man
from feeling and acting unhistarically. From an infinite horizon he
then returns to himself, to the smallest egoistic enclosure, and
there he must grow withered and dry: probably he attains to
cleverness, never to wisdom. He 'listens to reason', calculates
and accommodates himself to the facts, keeps calm, blinks and
*From As You Like It, Act II Scene vii.
1 1 5
knows how to seek his own or his party's advantage in the advantage
and disadvantage of others; he unlearns unnecessary modesty and
thus step by step becomes the Hartmannesque 'man' and then
'greybeard'. But that is what he is supposed to become, precisely that is
the sense of the cynical demand for the 'total surrender of the per­
sonality to the world-process'
for the sake of its goal, world­
redemption, as that rogue, E. von Hartmann, assures us. Well, the
will and goal of these Hartmannesque 'men' and 'greybeards' can
hardly be precisely world-redemption: though the world would cer­
tainly be more redeemed if it were redeemed from these men and
greybeards. For then there would come the empire of youth.
. Mindful of this situation in which youth finds itself ! cry Land! Land!
Enough and more than enough of the wild and erring voyage over
strange dark seas! At last a coast appears in sight: we must land on it
whatever it may be like, and the worst ofha-Mlours is better than to go
reeling back into a hopeless infinity of scepticism. Let us only make
land; later on we shall find good harbours right enough, and make
the landfall easier for those who come after us.
This voyage was perilous and exciting. How far we still are from
the quiet contemplativeness with which we first watched our ship
put out. In pursuit of the perils of history we have found ourselves
most acutely exposed to them; we ourselves bear visibly the traces of
those sufferings which afflict contemporary mankind as a result of
an excess of history, and I have no wish to conceal from myself that,
in the immoderation ofits criticism, in the immaturity of its humanity,
in its frequent transitions from irony to cynicism, from pride to scep­
ticism, the present treatise itself reveals its modern character, a
character marked by weakness of personality. And yet I trust in the
inspirational force which, in the absence of genius, powers my
vessel, I trust that youth has led me aright when it now compels me to pro­
test at the historical education of modern man and when I demand that
man should above all learn to live and should employ history only in
the seroice of the life he has learned to live. One has to be young to under­
stand this protest; indeed, in view of the premature greybeardedness
of our present-day youth one can hardly be young enough if one is to
grasp what is here really being protested against. An example will
help to make clear what I mean. It is hardly more than a century ago
. that there awoke in some young people in Germany a natural
1 1 6
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
instinct for what we call poetry. Is it supposed that the generations
before them and contemporary with them had failed even to mention
that art, even though it was strange to them? The opposite is, of course,
the case: they reflected, wrote and argued about 'poetry' with great
vigour, producing words about words about words as they did so.
This awakening to life of a word did not imply the death of those who
awoke it; in a certain sense they are still living, for if, as Gibbon says,
it requires only time, though a great deal of time, for a world to
perish, so it requires only time, though in Germany, the 'land of
gradualness', it requires very much more time, for a false idea to
perish. Nonetheless, there are now perhaps a hundred more people
than there were a hundred years ago who know what poetry is;
perhaps a hundred years hence there will be a further hundred who
by then will also have learned what culture is and that the Germans
have up to now possessed no culture, however much they may talk
and puff themselves up about it. To these people the Germans'
universal contentment with their 'culture' will appear as incredible
and silly as the once acclaimed classicism of Gottsched or Ramler's
reputation as the German Pindar appear to us. They will perhaps
think that this culture has been only a kind of knowledge about cul­
ture, and false and superficial knowledge at that. False and super­
ficial, that is, because one endured the contradiction between life
and knowledge and completely failed to see what characterized the
culture of genuinely cultured peoples: that culture can grow and
flourish only out of life; while among the Germans it was stuck on
like a paper flower or poured over like icing-sugar, and was thus con­
demned to remain forever deceitful and unfruitful. The education of
German youth, however, proceeds from precisely this false and
unfruitful conception of culture: its goal, viewed in its essence, is not
at all the free cultivated man but the scholar, the man of science, and
indeed the most speedily employable man of science, who stands
aside from life so as to know it unobstructedly; its result, observed
empirically, is the historical-aesthetic cultural philistine, the pre­
cocious and up-to-the-minute babbler about state, church and art,
the man who appreciates everything, the insatiable stomach which
nonetheless does not know what honest hunger and thirst are. That
an education with this goal and this result is an anti-natural one is
apprehensible only to one who has not yet been fully processed by it;>
it is apprehensible only to the instinct of youth, for youth still
possesses that instinct of nature which remains intact until artificially
and forcibly shattered by this education. He who wants, on the con-
1 1 7
trary, to shatter this education has to help youth to speak out, he has
to light the path their unconscious resistance has hitherto taken with
the radiance of concepts and transform it to a conscious and loudly
vocal awareness. But how can he achieve so strange a goal?
Above all by destroying a superstition: the belief in the necessity of
this educational operation. The usual view is that our present highly
disagreeable reality is the only one in any way possible. Examine
with this in mind the literature of our higher school and educational
system over the past decades: one will see with angry astonishment
that, all the varying proposals and vehement contentions not­
withstanding, the actual objective of education is everywhere
thought of as being the same; that the outcome of education hitherto,
the production of the 'educated man' as he is at present understood,
is unhesitatingly assumed to be the necessary and rational foun­
dation of all future education. The uniform canon is that the young
man has to start with a knowledge of culture, not even with a
knowledge of life and even less with life and experience itself. And
this knowledge of culture is instilled into the,¥outh in the form of his­
torical knowledge; that is to say, his head is crammed with a tremen­
dous number of ideas derived from a highly indirect knowledge of
past ages and peoples, not from direct observation oflife. His desire
to experience something himself and to feel evolving within him a
coherent living complex of experiences of his own such a desire is
confused and as it were made drunk by the illusory promise that it is
possible to sum up in oneself the highest and most noteworthy
experiences offormer ages, and precisely the greatest offormer ages,
in a few years. It is exactly the same crazy method as that which leads
our young painters into picture-galleries instead of into the
workshop of a master and before all into the unique workshop of the
unique master, nature. As though one could appropriate the arts
and sciences of past times, the actual yield of their life's experience,
by taking a fleeting stroll through the gallery of history! As though
life itself were not a craft which must be learned from the ground up
and practised remorselessly if it is not to eventuate in mere babblers
and bunglers! -
Plato considered it necessary that the first generation of his new
society (in the perfect state) should be educated with the aid of a
mighty necessary lie: the children were to be taught to believe that they
had all formerly dwelt asleep under the earth, where they had been
kneaded into shape by nature's workman. Impossible to rebel
1 1 8
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
against a past of this sort! Impossible to go against the work of the
gods! It was to count as an inviolable law of nature: he who is born a
philosopher has gold in his body, he who is born a soldier has only
silver, he who is born a worker has iron and bronze. As it is im­
possible to blend these metals together, Plato explained; so it should
be impossible ever to mingle or confound the order of castes; belief
in theaeterna veritas of this order is the foundation of the new education
and therewith of the new state. - Now, this is how the modern German
believes in theaeterna veritas of his system of education, of his kind of
culture: and yet this belief would crumble away, as the Platonic state
would have crumbled away, if the necessary lie were for once coun­
tered with a necessary troth: the truth that the German possesses no
culture because his education provides no basis for one. He wants
the flower without the root and the stem: consequently he wants it in
vain. That is the simple truth, a coarse and unpleasant truth, truly a
necessary truth.
It is in this necessary truth, however, that our first generation must be
educated; they will certainly suffer the most from it, for through it
they will have to educate themselves, and in opposition to them­
selves moreover, to a new custom and nature and out of an old and
first nature and custom: so that they could say to themselves in old
Spanish: Defienda me Dios de my, God guard me from myself, that is to
say from the nature already educated into me. It must taste this truth
drop by drop, like a fierce and bitter medicine, and each one of this
generation must overcome himself to the extent of being able to say
of himself what he would find it easier to endure if it were said of an
entire age: we are without culture, more, we are ruined for living, for
right and simple seeing and hearing, for happily seizing what is
nearest and most natural to us, and do not yet possess even the basis
of a culture, because we are not even convinced we have genuine life
in us. Fragmented ' and in pieces, dissociated almost mechanically
into an inner and an outer, sown with concepts as with dragon's
teeth, bringing forth conceptual dragons, suffering from the malady
of words and mistrusting any feeling of our own which has not yet
been stamped with words: being such an unliving and yet uncannily
active concept- and word-factory, perhaps I still have the right to say
of myself cogUoJ ergo sum, but not vivo, ergo cogito. Empty 'being' is granted
me, but not full and green 'life'; the feeling that tells me I exist
warrants to me only that I am a thinking creature, not that I am a living
one, not that I am an animal but at most a cogital. O nly give me life,
1 1 9
;: :
I
I
II
,
then I will create a culture for you out of it! - Thus cries each
individual of this generation and all those individuals will recognize
one another from this cry. Who is to give them this life?
No god and no man: only their own youth: unchain this and you
will therewith have liberated life. For life was only lying hidden, in
prison, it has not yet withered away and died
ask yourselves if
it has!
But it is sick, this unchained life, and needs to be cured. It is sick
with many illnesses and not only with the memory of its chains -
what chiefly concerns us here is that it is suffering from the malady of
history. Excess of history has attacked life's plastic powers, it no longer
knows how to employ the past as a nourishing food. The evil is
dreadful, and yet! if youth did not possess nature's clairvoyant gift no
one would know it is an evil or that a paradise of health has been lost.
This same youth, however, also divines with the curative instinct of
this same nature how this paradise is to be regained; it knows the
medicine and balsam against the malady of history, against excess of
history: but what is this medicine called?
Now, one must not be surprised to find that it is called by the
names of poisons: the antidote to the historical is called -the unhistorical
and the suprahistorical. And with these names we return to the begin­
ning of our reflections and to its meditative calm.
With the word 'the unhistorical' I designate the art and power of
forgetting and of enclosing oneself within a bounded horizon; I call
'suprahistorical' the powers which lead the eye away from becoming
towards that which bestows upon existence the character of the eternal
and stable, towards art and religion. Science - for it is science which
would here speak of poisons - sees in these two forces hostile forces:
for science considers the only right and true way of regarding things,
that is to say the only scientific way, as being that which sees
everywhere things that have been, things historical, and nowhere
things that are, things eternal; it likewise lives in a profound
antagonism towards the eternalizing powers of art and religion, for it
hates forgetting, which is the death of knowledge, and seeks to
abolish all limitations of horizon and launch mankind upon an
infinite and unbounded sea of light whose light is knowledge of
all becoming.
If only man could live in it! As cities collapse and grow desolate
when there is an earthquake and man erects his house on volcanic
land only in fear and trembling and only briefly, so life itself caves in
and grows weak and fearful when the concept-quake caused by science
1 20
On the uses and disadvantages of history for life
robs man of the foundation of all his rest and security, his belief in
the enduring and eternal. Is life to dominate knowledge and science,
or is knowledge to dominate life? Which of these two forces is the
higher and more decisive? There can be no doubt: life is the higher,
the dominating force, for knowledge which annihilated life would
have annihilated itself with it. Knowledge presupposes life and thus
has in the preservation oflife the same interest as any creature has in
its own continued existence. Thus science requires superintendence
and supervision; a hygiene of life belongs close beside science and one
of the clauses of this hygiene would read: the unhistorical and the
suprahistorical are the natural antidotes to the stifling of life by the
historical, by the malady of history. It is probable that we who suffer
from the malady of history will also have to suffer from the antidotes.
But that we suffer from them is no evidence against the correctness
of the chosen treatment.
And here I recognize the mission of that youth I have spoken of,
that first generation of fighters and dragon-slayers which will pre­
cede a happier and fairer culture and humanity without itself having
more than a presentiment of this future happiness and beauty. This
youth will suffer from both the sickness and the antidotes: and none­
theless it will believe itself entitled to boast of a more robust health
and in general a more natural nature than its predecessors, the
cultivated 'man' and 'greybeard' of the present. Its mission,
however, is to undermine the concepts this present has of 'health'
and 'culture' and to excite mockery and hatred against these hybrid
monsters of concepts; and the sign that guarantees the superior
robustness of its own health shall be that this youth can itself dis­
cover no concept or slogan in the contemporary currency of words
and concepts to describe its own nature, but is only aware of the
existence within it of an active power that fights, excludes and
divides and of an ever more intense feeling of life. One may assen
that this youth does not yet possess culture
but for what youth
would this constitute a reproach? One may point to its coarseness
and immoderation - but it is not yet old or wise enough to moderate
its claims; above all, it does not need hypocritically to defend a
finished culture and it enjoys all the consolations and privileges that
go with youth, especially the privilege of courageous, unreflecting
honesty and the inspiring consolation of hope.
Of these hopeful young people I know that they understand all
these generalities from close personal experience and will translate
them into a teaching intended for themselves; the others may for the
1 2 1
moment perceive only covered dishes that might well be empty:
until one day they behold with surprise that the dishes are full and
that attacks, demands, life-drives, passions have lain mingled and
pressed together in these generalities and that they could not lie thus
concealed for very long. Leaving these doubters to time, which
brings all things to light, I turn in conclusion to that company of the
hopeful to tell them in a parable of the course and progress of their
cure, their delivery from the malady of history, and therewith their
own history, up to the point at which they will be sufficiently healthy
again to study history and, to the ends oflife, to employ the past in its
three senses, namely monumental or antiquarian or critical. At that
point they will be more ignorant than the 'cultivated' people of this
present, for they will have unlearned many things and even have lost
all desire so much as to glance at that which these cultivated people
want to know most of all; from the point of view of these cultivated
people, their distinguishing marks are precisely their 'un culture' ,
their indifference and reserve towards much that is of high repute,
even towards much that is good. Hut atihis end-point of their cure
they will have become human again and have ceased to be merely
aggregates of humanlike qualities - that is something! That is some­
thing to hope for! Do your hearts not laugh when you hope, you
hopeful young people?
And how can we attain that goal? you will ask. At the beginning of
a journey towards that goal, the god of Delphi cries to you his oracle:
'Know yourself.' I t  is a hard saying: for that god 'conceals nothing
and says nothing, but only indicates, as Heraclitus has said. What
does he indicate to you?
There were centuries during which the Greeks found themselves
faced by a danger similar to that which faces us: the danger of being
overwhelmed by what was past and foreign, of perishing through
'history'. They never lived in proud inviolability: their 'culture' was,
rather, for a long time a chaos of foreign, Semitic, Babylonian,
Lydian, Egyptian forms and ideas, and their religion truly a battle of
all the gods of the East: somewhat as 'German culture' and religion is
now a struggling chaos of all the West and of all past ages. And yet,
thanks to that Apollonian oracle, Hellenic culture was no mere
aggregate. The Greeks gradually learned to organize the chaos by
following the Delphic teaching and thinking back to themselves, that
is, to their real needs, and letting their pseudo-needs die out. Thus
they again took possession of themselves; they did not long remain
the overburdened heirs and epigones of the entire Orient; after hard
1 22
On the uses and disadvantages of history Jor life
struggle with themselves and through protracted application of that
oracle, they even became the happiest enrichers and augmenters of
the treasure they had inherited and the first-born and models of all
future cultured nations.
This is a parable for each one of us: he must organize the chaos
within him by thinking back to his real needs. His honesty, the
strength and truthfulness of his character, must at some time or
other rebel against a state of things in which he only repeats what he
has heard, learns what is already known, imitates what already exists;
he will then begin to grasp that culture can be something other than
a decoration of life , that is to say at bottom no more than dissimulation
and disguise; for all adornment conceals that which is adorned.
Thus the Greek conception of culture will be unveiled to him
in
antithesis to the Roman - the conception of culture as a new and
improvedphysis, without inner and outer, without dissimulation and
convention, culture as a unanimity oflife, thought, appearance and
will. Thus he will learn from his own experience that it was through
the higher force of their moral nature that the Greeks achieved victory
over all other cultures, and that every increase in truthfulness must
also assist to promote true culture: even though this truthfulness may
sometimes seriously damage precisely the kind of cultivatedness
now held in esteem, even though it may even be able to procure the
dowI"i.fall of an entire merely decorative culture.
1 23
Schopenhauer
as Educator
I
I
I
Iii
t
,.
, ;
A traveller who had seen many lands and peoples and several of the
earth's continents was asked what quality in men he had discovered
everywhere he had gone. He replied: 'They have a tendency to lazi­
ness.' To many it will seem that he ought rather to have said: 'They
are all timid. They hide themselves behind customs and opinions.'
In his heart every man knows quite well that, being unique, he will
be in the world only once and that no imaginable chance will for a
second time gather together into a unity so strangely variegated an
assortment as he is: he knows it but he hides it like a bad conscience­
why? From fear of his neighbour, who demands conventionality and
cloaks himself with it. But what is it that constrains the individual to
fear his neighbour, to think and act like a member of a herd, and to
have no joy in himself? Modesty, perhaps, in a few rare cases. With
the great majority it is indolence, inertia, in short that tendency to
laziness of which the traveller spoke. He is right: men are even lazier
than they are timid, and fear most of all the inconveniences with
which unconditional honesty and nakedness would burden them.
Artists alone hate this sluggish promenading in borrowed fashions
and. appropriated opinions and they reveal everyone's secret bad
conscience, the law that every man is a unique miracle; they dare to
show us man as he is, uniquely himself to every last movement of his
muscles, more, that in being thus stricdy consistent in uniqueness he
is beautiful, and worth regarding, and in no way tedious. When the
great thinker despises mankind, he despises its laziness: for it is on
account of their laziness that men seem like factory products, things
of no consequence and unworthy to be associated with or instructed.
The man who does not wish to belong to the mass needs only to
cease taking himself easily; let him follow his conscience, which calls
to him: 'Be your self! All you are now doing, thinking, desiring, is
not you yourself.'
Every youthful soul hears this call day and night and trembles
when he hears it; for the idea ofits liberation gives it a presentiment
of the measure of happiness allotted it from all eternity -a happiness
to which it can by no means attain so long as it lies fettered by the
chains offear and convention. And how dismal and senseless life can
1 27
be without this liberation! There exists no more repulsive and deso­
late creature in the world than the man who has evaded his genius
and who now looks furtively to left and right, behind him and all
about him. In the end such a man becomes impossible to get hold
of, since he is wholly exterior, without kernel, a tattered, painted bag
of clothes, a decked-out ghost that cannot inspire even fear and cer­
tainly not pity. And if it is true to say of the lazy that they kill time,
then it is greatly to be feared that an era which sees its salvation in
public opinion, that is to say private laziness, is a time that really will
be killed: I mean that it will be struck out of the history of the true
liberation oflife. How reluctant later generations will be to have any­
thing to do with the relics of an era ruled, not by living men, but by
pseudo-men dominated by public opinion; for which reason our
age may be to some distant posterity the darkest and least known,
because least human, portion of human history. I go along the new
streets of our cities and think how, of all these gruesome houses
which the generation of public opinion has built for itself, not one
will be standing in a hundred years' tiŔ, and how the opinions of
these house-builders will no doubt by then likewise have collapsed.
On the other hand, how right it is for those who do not feel them­
selves to be citizens of this time to harbour great hopes; for if they
were citizens of this time they too would be helping to kill their time
and so perish with it -while their desire is rather to awaken their time
to life and so live on themselves in this awakened life.
But even if the future gave us no cause for hope
the fact of our
existing at all in this here-and-now must be the strongest incentive to
us to live according to our own laws and standards: the inexplicable
fact that we live precisely today, when we had all infinite time in
which to come in to existence, that we possess only a shordived today
in which to demonstrate why and to what end we came into existence
now and at no other time. We are responsible to ourselves for our
own existence; consequently we want to be the true helmsman of
this existence and refuse to allow our existence to resemble a mind­
less act of chance. One has to take a somewhat bold and dangeroufi
line with this existence: especially as, whatever happens, we are
bound to lose it. Why go on clinging to this clod of earth, this way of
life, why pay heed to what your neighbour says? It is so parochial to
bind oneself to views which are no longer binding even a couple of
hundred miles away. Orient and Occident are chalk-lines drawn
before us to fool our timidity. I will make an attempt to attain
freedom, the youthful soul says to itself; and is it to be hindered in
this by the fact that two nations happen to hate and fight one
Schopenhauer as educator
another, or that two continents are separated by an ocean, or that all
aroƍnd it a religion is taught which did not yet exist a couple of thou­
sand years ago. All that is not you, it says to itself. No one can con­
struct for you the bridge upon which precisely you must cross the
stream of life, no one but you yourself alone. There are, to be sure,
countless paths and bridges and demi-gods which would bear you
through this stream; but only at the cost of yourself: you would put
yourself in pawn and lose yourself. There exists in the world a single
path along which no one can go except you: whither does it lead? Do
not ask, go along it. Who was it who said: 'a man never rises higher
than when he does not know whither his path can still lead him'?*
But how can we find ourselves again? How can man know him­
self? He is a thing dark and veiled; and if the hare has seven skins,
man can slough off seventy times seven and still not be able to say:
'this is really you, this is no longer outer shell'. Moreover, it is a pain­
ful and dangerous undertaking thus to tunnel into oneself and to
force one's way down into the shaft of one's being by the nearest
path. A man who does it can easily so hurt himself that no physician
can cure him. And, moreover again, what need should there be for
it, since everything bears witness to what we are, our friendships and
enmities, our glance and the clasp of our hand, our memory and that
which we do not remember, our books and our handwriting. This,
however, is the means by which an inquiry into the most important
aspect can be initiated. Let the youthful soul look back on life with
the question: what have you truly loved up to now, what has drawn
your soul aloft, what has mastered it and at the same time blessed it?
Set up these revered objects before you and perhaps their nature and
their sequence will give you a law, the fundamental law of your own
true self. Compare these objects one with another, see how one com­
pletes, expands, surpasses, transfigures another, how they constitute
a stepladder upon which you have clambered up to yourself as you
are now; for your true nature lies, not concealed deep within you,
but immeasurably high above you, or at least above that which you
usually take yourself to be. Your true educators and formative
teachers reveal to you that the true, original meaning and basic
stuff of your nature is something completely incapable of being
educated or formed and is in any case something difficult of access,
bound and paralysed; your educators can be only your liberators.
"Oliver Cromwell,
as quoted in Ralph Waldo Emerson's essay 'Circles'.
Nietzsche read Emerson's Essays in G. Fabricus's German translation (1858) , a
copy of which he owned and studied with great care.
And that is the secret of all culture: it does not provide artificial
limbs, wax noses or spectacles - that which can provide these things
is, rather, only sham education. Culture is liberation, the removal of
all the weeds, rubble and vermin that want to attack the tender buds
of the plant, an outstreaming oflight and warmth, the gentle rustling
of nocturnal rain, it is imitation and worship of nature where nature
is in her motherly and merciful mood, it is the perfecting of nature
when it deflects her cruel and merciless assaults and turns them to
good, and when it draws a veil over the expressions of nature's step­
motherly mood and her sad lack of understanding.
Certainly there may be other means of finding oneself, of coming
to oneself out of the bewilderment in which one usually wanders
as in a dark cloud, but I know of none better than to think on
one's true educators and cultivators. And so today I shall remem­
ber one of the teachers and taskmasters of whom I can boast,
Arthu'f Schopenhauer- and later on I shall recall others.
IJ
If I am to describe what an event my first glance at Schopenhauer's
writings was for me, I must dwell for a moment on an idea which
used to come to me in my youth more pressingly, and more frequently,
than perhaps any other. When in those days I roved as I pleased
through wishes of all kinds, I always believed that at some time fate
would take from me the terrible effort and duty of educating myself:
I believed that, when the time came, I would discover a philosopher
to educate me, a true philosopher whom one could follow without
any misgiving because one would have more faith in him than one
had in oneself. Then I asked myself: what would be the principles by
which he would educate you? - and I reflected on what he might say
about the two educational maxims which are being hatched in our
time. One of them demands that the educator should quickly
recognize the real strength of his pupil and then direct all his efforts
and energy and heat at them so as to help that one virtue to attain
true maturity and fruitfulness. The other maxim, on the contrary,
requires that the educator should draw forth and nourish all the forces
which exist in his pupil and bring them to a harmonioǱs
relationship with one another. But should he who has a deǲided
inclination to be a goldsmith for that reason be forcibly compelled to
study music? Is one to agree that Benvenuto Cellini's father was right
continually to force him to play the 'dear little horn' - 'that accursed
1 30
Schopenhauer as educator
piping', as his son called it? In the case of such strong and definite
talents one would not agree: so could it perhaps be that that maxim
advocating a harmonious development should be applied only to
more mediocre natures in which, though there may reside a con­
geries of needs and inclinations, none of them amounts to very
much taken individually? But where do we discover a harmonious
whole at all, a simultaneous sounding of many voices in one nature,
if not in such men as Cellini, men in whom everything, knowledge,
desire, love, hate, strives towards a central point, a root force, and
where a harmonious system is constructed through the compelling
domination of this living centre? And so perhaps these two maxims
are not opposites at all? Perhaps the one simply says that man should
have a centre and the other that he should also have a periphery?
That educating philosopher of whom I dreamed would, I came to
think, not only discover the central force, he would -also know how to
prevent its acting destructively on the other forces: his educational
task would, it seemed to me, be to mould the whole man into a living
solar and planetary system and to understand its higher laws of
motion.
In the meantime I still lacked this philosopher, and I tried this one
and that one; I discovered how wretched we modern men appear
when compared with the Greeks and Romans even merely in the
matter of a serious understanding of the tasks of education. With the
need for this in one's heart one can run through all Germany,
especially its universities, and fail to find what one is seeking; for
many far simpler and more basic desires are still unfulfilled there.
Anyone who seriously wanted to train in Germany as an orator, for
example, or intended to enter a school for writers, would find that
school nowhere; it seems not to have been realized that speaking
and writing are arts which cannot be acquired without the most careful
instruction and arduous apprenticeship. Nothing, however, dis­
plays the arrogant self-satisfaction of our contemporaries more
clearly or shamefully than their half niggardly, half thoughtless
undemandingness in regard to teachers and educators. What will
not suffice, even among our noblest and best-instructed families,
under the name of family tutor; what a collection of antiques and
eccentrics is designated a grammar school and not found wanting;
what are we not content with for a university - what leaders, what
institutions, in comparison with the difficulty of the task of educating
a man to be a man! Even the much admired way in which our German
men of learning set about their scientific pursuits reveals above all
1 3 1
I i
that they are thinking more of science than they. are of mankind, that
they have been trained to sacrifice themselves to it like a legion of the
lost, so as in turn to draw new generations on to the same sacrifice. If
it is not directed and kept within bounds by a higher maxim of
education, but on the contrary allowed to run wilder and wilder on
the principle 'the more the better', traffic with science is certainly as
harmful to men oflearning as the economic principle of laissezfaire is
to the morality of whole.nations. Who is there that still remembers
that the education of the scholar is an extremely difficult problem, if
his humanity is not to be sacrificed in the process - and yet this dif­
ficulty is plainly obvious when one regards the numerous examples
of those who through an unthinking and premature devotion to
science have become crookbacked and humped. But there is an even
weightier witness to the absence of all higher education, weightier
and more perilous and above all much more common. If it is at once
obvious why an orator or a writer cannot now be educated in these
arts - because there are no educators for them -; if it is almost as
obvious why a scholar must now becoƗe distorted and contorted -
because he is supposed to be educated by science, that is to say by an
inhuman abstraction - then one finally asks oneself: where are we,
scholars and unscholarly, high placed and low, to find the moral
exemplars and models among our contemporaries, the visible
epitome of morality for our time? What has become of any reflection
on questions of morality - questions that have at all times engaged
every more highly civilized society? There is no longer any model or
any reflection of any kind; what we are in fact doing is consuming the
moral capital we have inherited from our forefathers, which we are
incapable of increasing but know only how to squander; in our
society one either remains silent about such things or speaks of them
in a way that reveals an utter lack of acquaintance with or experience
of them and that can only excite revulsion. Thus it has come about
that our schools and teachers simply abstain from an education in
morality or make do with mere formalities: and virtue is a word that
no longer means anything to our teachers or pupils, an old­
fashioned word that makes one smile - and it is worse if one does not
smile, for then one is being a hypocrite.
The explanation of this spiriclessness and of why all moral energy
is at such a low ebb is difficult and involved; but no one who con­
siders the influence victorious Christianity had on the morality of
our ancient world can overlook the reaction of declining Christianity
upon our own time. Through the exalted ness of its ideal, Chris-
1 32
Schopenhauer as educator
tianity excelled the moral systems of antiquity and the naturalism
that resided in them to such a degree that this naturalism came to
excite apathy and disgust; but later on, when these better and higher
ideals, though now known, proved unattaina,ble, it was no longer
possible to return to what was good and high in antique virtue,
however much one might want to. It is in this oscillation between
Christianity and antiquity, between an imitated or hypocritical
Christianity of morals and an equally despondent and timid revival
of antiquity, that modern man lives, and does not live very happily;
the fear of what is natural he has inherited and the renewed attrac­
tion of this naturalness, the desire for a firm footing somewhere,
the impotence of his knowledge that reels back and forth between
the good and the better, all this engenders a restlessness, a disorder
in the modern soul which condemns it to a joyless unfruitfulness.
Never have moral educators been more needed, and never has it
seemed less likely they would be found; in the times when physicians
are required the most, in times of great plagues, they are also most in
peril. For where are the physicians for modern mankind who them­
selves stand so firmly and soundly on their feet that they are able to
support others and lead them by the hand? A certain gloominess
and torpor lies upon even the finest personalities of our time, a feeling
of ill-humour at the everlasting struggle between dissimulation and
honesty which is being fought out within them, a lack of steady con­
fidence in themselves - whereby they become quite incapable of
being signposts and at the same time taskmasters for others.
It was thus truly roving through wishes to imagine I might dis­
cover a true philosopher as ,an educator who could raise me above
my insufficiencies insofar as these originated in the age and teach me
again to be simple and honest in thought and life, that is to say to be
untimely, that word understood in the profoundest sense; for men
have now become so complex and many-sided they are bound to
become dishonest whenever they speak at all, make assertions and
try to act in accordance with them.
It was in this condition of need, distress and desire that I came to
know Schopenhauer.
I am one of those readers of Schopenhauer who when they have
read one page of him know for certain they will go on to read all the
pages and will pay heed to every word he ever said. I trusted him at
once and my trust is the same now as it was nine years ago. Though
this is a foolish and immodest way of putting it, I understand him as
though it were for me he had written. Thus it is that I have never dis-
1 33
covered any paradox in him, though here and there a Ilttle error; for
what are paradoxes but assertions which carry no conviction
because their author himself is not really convinced of them and
makes them only so as to glitter and seduce and in general cut a
figure. Schopenhauer never wants to cut a figure: for he writes for
himself and no one wants to be deceived, least of all a philosopher
who has made it a rule for himself: deceive no one, not even yourselfl
Not even with the pleasant sociable deception which almost every
conversation entails and which writers imitate almost unconsciously;
even less with the conscious deception of the orator and by the arti­
ficial means of rhetoric. Schopenhauer, on the contrary, speaks with
himself: or, if one feels obliged to imagine an auditor, one should
think of a son being instructed by his father. It is an honest, calm,
good natured discourse before an auditor who listens to it with love.
We are lacking such writers. The speaker's powerful sense of well..:.
being embraces us immediately he begins to speak; we feel as we do
on entering the high forest, we take a deep breath and acquire that
sense of wellbeing ourselves. We feel thatjlere we shall always find a
bracing air; here there is a certain inimitable unaffectedness and
naturalness such as is possessed by men who are within themselves
masters of their own house, and a very rich house at that: in contrast
to those writers who surprise themselves most when they for once
say something sensible and whose style therefore acquires some­
thing restless and unnatural. Schopenhauer's- voice reminds us just
as little of the scholar whose limbs are naturally stiff and whose chest
is narrow and who therefore goes about with awkward embarrass-
. ment or a strutting gait; while on the other hand Schopenhauer's
rough and somewhat bear-like soul teaches us not so much to feel
the absence of the suppleness and courtly charm of good French
writers as to disdain it, and no one will discover in him that imitated,
as it were silver-plated pseudo- Frenchness in which German writers
so much indulge. Schopenhauer's way of expressing himself
reminds me here and there a little of Goethe, but otherwise he recalls
no German model at all. For he understands how to express the pro­
found with simplicity, the moving without rhetoric, the strictly
scientific without pedantry: and from what German could he have
learned this? He is also free of the over-subtle, over-supple and - if I
may be allowed to say so - not very German style that characterizes
Lessing: which is a great merit in him, for Lessing is the most seduc­
tive of all German writers of prose. And, to say without more ado the
highest thing I can say in regard to his style, I cannot do better than
1 34
Sclwpenhauer as educator
quote a sentence of his own: 'a philosopher must be very honest not
to call poetry or rhetoric to his aid'. That there is something called
honesty and that it is even a virtue belongs, I know, in the age of
public opinion to the private opinions that are forbidden; and thus I
shall not be praising Schopenhauer but only characterizing him if I
repeat: he is honest even as a writer; and so few writers are honest
that one ought really to mistrust anyone who writes. I know of only
one writer whom I would compare with Schopenhauer, indeed set
above him, in respect of honesty: Montaigne. That such a man wrote
has truly augmented the joy ofliving on this earth. Since getting to
know this freest anƎ mightiest of souls, I at least have come to feel
what he felt about Plutarch: 'as soon as I glance at him I grow a leg or
a wing.'* If I were set the task, I could endeavour to make myself
at home in the world with him.
Schopenhauer has a second quality in common with Montaigne,
as well as honesty: a cheerfulness that really cheers. Aliis laetus, sibi
sapiens. t For there are two very different kinds of cheerfulness. The
true thinker always cheers and refreshes, whether he is being serious
or humorous, expressing his human insight or his divine for­
bearance; without peevish gesturing, trembling hands, tearfilled
eyes, but with certainty and simplicity, courage and .strength,
perhaps a little harshly and valiantly but in any case as a victor: and
this it is
to behold the victorious god with all the monsters he has
combated
that cheers one most profoundly. The cheerfulness one
sometimes encounters in mediocre writers and bluff and abrupt
thinkers, on the other hand, makes us feel miserable when we read
it: the effect produced upon me, for example, by David Strauss's
cheerfulness. One feels downright ashamed to have such cheerful
contemporaries, because they compromise our time and the people
in it before posterity. This kind of cheerful thinker simply does not
see the sufferings and the monsters he purports to see and combat;
and his cheerfulness is vexing because he is deceiving us: he wants to
make us believe that a viaory has been fought and won. For at bottom
there is cheerfulness only where there is a victory; and this applies to
the works of true thinkers just as much as it does to any work of art.
Let its content be as dreadful and as serious as the problem of life
itself: the work will produce a depressing and painful effect only if
"" A misunderstandingofMontaigne's assertion: 'Je ne Ie puis si peu accointer que je
n'en tire cuisse ou aisle', which Florio translates as: 'He can no sooner come in my
sight bur I pull some leg or wing from him.'
tAliis [actus, sibi sapiens: cheerful for others, wise for himself
1 35
the semi-thinker and semi-artist has exhaled over it the vapour of his
inadequacy; while nothing better or happier can befall a man than to
be in the proximity of one of those victors who, precisely because
they have thought most deeply, must love what is most living and, as
sages, incline in the end to the beautiful. They speak truly, they do
not stammer, and do not chatter about what they have heard; they
are active and live truly and not the uncanny masquerade men are
accustomed to live: which is why in their proximity we for once feel
human and natural and might exclaim with Goethe: 'How glorious
and precious a living thing is! how well adapted to the conditions it
lives in, how true, how full of being!'*
I am describing nothing but the first, as it were physiological,
impression Schopenhauer produced upon me, that magical out­
pouring of the inner strength of one natural creature on to another
that follows the first and most fleeting encounter; and when I subse­
quently analyse that impression I discover it to be compounded of
three elements, the elements of his honesty, his cheerfulness and his
steadfastness. He is honest because he .6peaks and writes to himself
and for himself, cheerful because he has conquered the hardest task
by thinking, and steadfast because he has to be. His strength rises
straight and calmly upwards like a flame when there is no wind,
imperturbably, without restless wavering. He finds his way every
time before we have so much as noticed that he has been seeking it;
as though compelled by a law of gravity he runs on ahead, so firm
and agile, so inevitably. And whoever has felt what it means to dis­
cover among our tragelaphine ment of today a whole, complete,
self-moving, unconstrained and unhampered natural being will
understand my joy and amazement when I discovered Schopenhauer:
I sensed that in him I had discovered that educator and philosopher
I had sought for so long. But I had discovered him only in the form
of a book, and that was a great deficiency. So I strove all the harder to
see through the book and to imagine the living man whose great tes­
tament I had to read and who promised to make his heirs only those
who would and could be more than merely his readers: namely his
sons and pupils.
I profit from a philosopher only insofar as he can be an example.
That he is capable of drawing whole nations after him through this
Cl From the Italienische Reise, 9 October 1786.
t'Tragelaphen-Menschheit'. A 'tragelaph' is a 'goat-stag', i.e. a 'horned beast'.
1 36
Schopenhauer as educator
example is beyond doubt; the history of India, which is almost the
history of Indian philosophy, proves it. But this example must be
supplied by his outward life and not merely in his books - in the way,
that is, in which the philosophers of Greece taught, through their
bearing, what they wore and ate, and their morals, tather than by
what they said, let alone by what they wrote. How completely this
courageous visibility of the philosophical life is lacking in Germany!
where the body is only just beginning to liberate itself long after
the spirit seems to have been liberated; and yet it is only an illu­
sion that a spirit can be free and independent if this achieved
unlimitedness - which is at bottom creative self-limitation - is not
demonstrated anew from morn till night through every glance
and every gesture. Kant clung to his university, submitted himself
to its regulations, retained the appearance of religious belief,
endured to live among colleagues and students: so it is natural
that his example has produced above all university professors and
professorial philosophy. Schopenhauer had little patience with
the scholarly castes, separated himself from them, strove to be
independent of state and society - this is his example, the model
he provides - to begin with the most superficial things. But many
stages in the liberation of the philosophical life are still unknown
among the Germans, though they will not always be able to
remain unknown. Our artists are living more boldly and more
honestly; and the mightiest example we have before us, that of
Richard Wagner, shows how the genius must not fear to enter into
the most hostile relationship with the existing forms and order if
he wants to bring to light the higher order and truth that dwells
within him. 'Truth', however, of which our professors speak so
much, seems to be a more modest being from which no disorder
and nothing extraordinary is to be feared: a self-contented and
happy creature which is continually assuring all the powers that
be that no one needs to be the least concerned on its account; for
it is, after all, only 'pure science'. Thus what I was trying to say is
that the philosopher in Germany has more and more to unlearn
how to be 'pure science': and it is to precisely that end that
Schopenhauer as a human being can serve as an example.
It is, however, . nothing less than a miracle that he was able to
become this human example: for he was pressed upon, from within
and without, by the most tremendous dangers which would have
crushed or shattered any weaker being. It seems to me there was a
strong probability that Schopenhauer the human being would
perish and at best leave behind 'pure science': but'this too only at
best; most probably neither human being nor science would remain.
An Englishman recently described the most general danger facing
uncommon men who live in a society tied to convention: 'Such alien
characters at first become submissive, then melancholic, then ill and
finally they die. A Shelley would not have been able to live in
England, and a race of Shelleys would have been impossible.'* Our
HOlderlin and Kleist, and who knows who else besides, were ruined
by their uncommonness and could not endure the climate of so­
called German culture; and only natures of iron, such as Beethoven,
Goethe, Schopenhauer and Wagner are able to stand firm. But these
too exhibit many of the effects of the wearying struggle they have had
to engage in: they breathe heavily and their voice can easily become
too loud .  A practised diplomat who had seen and spoken with
Goethe only now and then told his friends: 'Voila un homme, qui a
eu de grands chagrins!' - which Goethe translated as: 'There is
another one who has had a hard time of it!' and added: 'If the traces
of the sufferings we have endured an<l the deeds we have carried
through cannot be expunged from our faces, it is no wonder if
everything that remains of us and of our endeavours bears the same
impress.' And this is the Goethe whom our cultural philistines point
to as the happiest of Germans, so as to demonstrate that it must
therefore be possible to be happy among them - with the impli­
cation that anyone who feels unhappy and solitary among them has
only himself to blame. It is from this proposition that they derive
and give practical expression to their cruel dogma that if a person is a
solitary it must be because he harbours a secret guilt. Now, poor
Schopenhauer had such a secret guilt on his conscience, namely that
of valuing his philosophy more than his contemporaries; and he
was, moreover, unhappily aware, precisely from the case of Goethe,
that if he was to save his philosophy from perishing he had at any
cost to defend it against the indifference of his contemporaries; for
there exists a species of inquisitorial censorship in which, according
to Goethe, the Germans are very skilled; it is called: unbreakable
silence. And it had achieved at any rate this much: the greater part of
the first edition of his chief work had to be reduced to waste paper.
The threatening danger that his great deed would be undone simply
through indifference created in him a terrible, barely controllable
,. Quoted, possibly from memory for it is not entirely accurate, from Walter
Bagehot's Physics and Politics. Bagehot refers to New England, not England.
1 38
Schopenhauer as educator
agitation; not a single adherent of any note appeared. It makes us sad
to see him hunting for the slightest sign that he was not utterly
unknown; and his loud, too loud, triumphing when he did finally
acquire readers (,legoret legar')* haƛ something painfully moving in it.
All the traits he exhibits that are riot those of the great philosopher
are those of the suffering human being fearful for the safety of his
noblest possessions; thus he is tonnented by fear of losing his modest
income and then perhaps being unable still to maintain his pure and
truly antique attitude towards philosophy; thus he often failed in his
many attempts to establish firm and sympathetic friendships and
was repeatedly obliged to return with a downcast eye to his faithful
dog. He was a total solitary; he had not a single companion truly of
his own kind to console him - and between one and none there lies,
as always between something and nothing, an infinity. No one who
possesses true friends knows what true solitude is, even though he
have the whole world around him for his enemies. - Ah, I well
understand that you do not know what solitude is. Where there have
been powerful societies, governments, religions, public opinions, in
short wherever there has been tyranny, there the solitary philosopher
has been hated; for philosophy offers an asylum to a man into which
no tyranny can force its way, the inward cave, the labyrinth of the
heart: and that annoys the tyrants. There the solitaries conceal them­
selves: but there too lurks their greatest danger. These people who
have fled inward for their freedom also have to live outwardly,
become visible, let themselves be seen; they are united with man­
kind through
countless ties
of blood, residence, education,
fatherland, chance, the importunity of others; they are likewise pre­
supposed to harbour countless opinions simply because these are
the ruling opinions of the time; every gesture which is not clearly a
denial counts as agreement; every motion of the hand that does not
destroy is interpreted as approval. They know, these solitaries, free
in spirit, that they continually seem other than what they think: while
they desire nothing but truth and honesty, they are encompassed by
a net of misunderstandings; and however vehemently they may
desire, they cannot prevent a cloud of false opinions, approxi­
mations, half-admissions, indulgent silence, erroneous interpret­
ation from gathering about their actions. Because of this a cloud of
melancholy gathers on their brows; for such as these it is more hate­
ful than death itself to be forced to present a semblance to the world;
""legor el Legar: I am read, I shall be read
1 39
and their perpetual bitter resentment of this constraiilt fills them
with volcanic menace. From time to time they revenge themselves
for their enforced concealment and compelled restraint. They
emerge from their cave wearing a terrifying aspect; their words and
deeds are then explosions and it is possible for them to perish .by
their own hand. This was the dangerous way in which Schopenhauer
lived. It is precisely such natures as he who want love, who need
companions before whom they can venture to be as simple and open
as they are before themselves and in whose presence they can cease
to suffer the torment of silence and dissimulation. If you remove
these companions you create an increasingly dangerous condition;
Heinrich von Kleist perished of not being loved, and the most terrible
antidote to uncommon men is to drive them so deep into themselves
that when they re-emerge it is always as a volcanic eruption. Yet there
will always be demi-gods who can endure to live, and live victoriously,
under such terrible conditions; and if you want to hear their lonely
song, listen to the music of Beethoven.
This was the first danger in whose shadCIA' Schopenhauer grew up:
isolation. The second was despair of the truth. This danger attends
every thinker who sets out from the Kantian philosophy, provided
he is a vigorous and whole man in suffering and desire and not a
mere clattering thought- an:d calculating-machine. Now we all know
very well the shameful implications of this presupposition; it seems
to me, indeed, that Kant has had a living and life-transforming
influence on only a very few men. One can read everywhere, I know,
that since this quiet scholar produced his work a revolution has
. taken place in every domain of the spirit; but I cannot believe it. For I
cannot see it in those men who would themselves have to be
revolutionized before a revolution could take place in any whole
domain whatever. If Kant ever should begin to exercise any wide
influence we shall be aware of it in the form of a gnawing and dis­
integrating scepticism and relativism; and only in the most active
and noble spirits who have never been able to exist in a state of doubt
would there appear instead that undermining and despair of all
truth such as Heinrich von Kleist for example experience as the
effect of the Kantian philosophy. 'Not long ago', he writes in his
moving way, 'I became acquainted with the Kantian philosophy
and I now have to tell you of a thought I derived from it, which I feel
free to do because I have no reason to fear it will shatter you so pro­
foundly and painfully as it has me. - We are unable to decide
whether that which we call truth really is truth, or whether it only
Schopenhauer as educator
appears to us to be. If the lattert then the truth we assemble here is
nothing' after our death, and all endeavour to acquire a possession
which will follow us to the grave is in vain. - If the point of this
thought does not penetrate your heart, do not smile at one who feels
wounded by it in the deepest and most sacred part of his being. My
one great aim has failed me and I have no other.'* When, indeed,
will men again feel iIi this natural Kleistian fashion, when will they
again learn to assess the meaning of a philosophy in the 'most sacred
part' of their being? And yet this must be done if we are to under­
stand what, after Kant, Schopenhauer can be to us - namely the
leader who leads us from the depths of sceptical gloom or criticizing
renunciation up to the heights of tragic contemplation, to the noc­
turnal sky and its stars extended endlessly above us, and who was
himself the first to take his path. His greatness lies in having set up
before him a picture of life as a whole, in order to interpret it as a
whole; while even the most astute heads cannot be dissuaded from
the error that one can achieve a more perfect interpretation if one
minutely investigates the paint with which this picture is produced
and the material upon which it is painted; perhaps with the result
that one concludes that it is a quite intricately woven canvas with
paint upon it which is chemically inexplicable. To understand the
picture one must divine the painter - that Schopenhatier knew.
Nowadays, however, the whole guild of the sciences is occupied in
understanding the canvas and the paint but not the picture; one can
say, " indeed, that only he who has a clear view of the picture of life
and existence as a whole can employ the individual sciences without
harm to himself, for without such a regulatory total picture they are
threads that nowhere come to an end and only render our life more
confused and labyrinthine. Schopenhauer is, as I said, great in that
he pursues this picture as Hamlet pursues the ghost, without letting
himself be led aside, as scholars are, or becoming enmeshed in
abstract scholasticism, as is the fate of rabid dialecticians. The study
of quarter-philosophers is enticing only so as to recognize that they
make at once for the places in the edifices of great philosophies
where scholarly for and against, where brooding, doubting, con­
tradicting are permitted, and that they thereby elude the challenge
of every great philosophy, which as a whole always says only: this is
the picture of all life, and learn from it the meaning of your own life.
And the reverse: only read your own life and comprehend from it
°Letter to Wilhelmine von Zenge, 22 March 1 80 1 .
the hieroglyphics of universal life. And this is how'Schopenhauer's
philosophy should also always be interpreted at first: individually,
by the individual only for himself, so as to gain insight into his OWl)
want and misery, into his own limitedness, so as then to learn the
nature of his antidotes and consolations: namely, sacrifice of the ego,
submission to the noblest ends, above all to those of justice and
compassion. He teaches us to distinguish between those things that
really promote human happiness and those that only appear to do
so: how neither riches nor honours nor erudition can lift the
individual out of the profound depression he feels at the valueless­
ness of his existence, and how the striving after these valued things
acquires meaning only through an exalted and transfiguring overall
goal: to acquire power so as to aid the evolution of the physis and to be
for a while the corrector of its follies and ineptitudes. At first only for
yourself, to be sure; but through yourself in the end for everyone. It
is true that this is a striving which by its nature leads towards resig­
nation: for what and how much is amenable to any kind ofimprove­
ment at all, in the individual or in tǳ generality!
If we apply these words to Schopenhauer, we touch on the third
and most characteristic danger in which he lived and which lay con­
cealed in the whole structure and skeleton of his being. Every human
being is accustomed to discovering in himself some limitation, of his
talent or of his moral will, which fills him with melancholy and longing;
and just as his feeling of sinfulness makes him long for the saint in
him, so as an intellectual being he harbours a profound desire for
the genius in him. This is the root of all true culture; and if I under­
stand by this the longing of man to be reborn as saint and genius, I
know that one does not have to be a Buddhist to understand this
myth. Where we discover talent devoid of that longing, in the world
of scholars or that of the so-called cultivated, we are repelled and dis­
gusted by it; for we sense that, with all their intellect, such people do
not promote an evolving culture and the procreation of genius -
which is the goal of all culture
but hinder it. It is a state of petri­
faction, equivalent in value to that routine, cold and self-laudatory
virtuousness which is also farthest, and keeps itself far, from true
saintliness. Now, Schopenhauer's nature contained a strange and
extremely dangerous dualism. Few thinkers have felt with a com­
parable intensity and certainty that genius moved within them; and
his genius promised him the highest - that there would be no deeper
furrow than that which his ploughshare was digging in the ground of
modern mankind. Thus he knew half his nature to be satisfied, its
1 42
Sclwpenhauer as educator
desires stilled, sure of its strength; thus he victoriously fulfilled his
calling with greatness and dignity. In the other half there dwelt a
burning longing; we comprehend it when we hear that he turned
away with a pained expression from the picture of the great founder
orla Trappe, * Rance, with the words: 'That is a matter of.grace.' For
the genius longs more deeply for sainthood because from his
watchtower he has seen farther and more clearly than other men,
down into the reconciliation of knowledge with being, over into the
domain of peace and denial of the will, across to the other coast of
which the Indians speak. But precisely here is the miracle: how
inconceivably whole and unbreakable must Schopenhauer's nature
have been if it could not be destroyed even by this longing and yet
was not petrified by it! What that means, each will understand
according to what and how much he is: and none of us will ever fully
understand it.
The more one reflects on the three dangers just described, the
more surprising it becomes that Schopenhauer should have defended
himself against them with such vigour and emerged from the battle
in such good shape. He bore many scars and open wounds, it is true;
and he had acquired a disposition that may perhaps seem a little too
astringent and sometimes also too pugnacious. But even the greatest
of men cannot attain to his own ideal. That Schopenhauer can offer
us a model is certain, all these scars and blemishes notwithstanding.
One might say, indeed, that that in his nature which was imperfect
and all too human brings us closer to him in a human sense, for it
lets us see him as a fellow sufferer and not only in the remote heights
of a genius.
Those three constitutional dangers that threatened Schopenhauer
threaten us all. Each of us bears a productive uniqueness within him
as the core of his being; and when he becomes aware of it, there
appears around him a strange penumbra which is the mark of his
singularity. Most find this something unendurable, because they
are, as aforesaid, lazy, and because a chain of toil and burdens is sus­
pended from this uniqueness. There can be no doubt that, for the
singular man who encumbers himself with this chain, life witholds
almost everything - cheerfulness, security, ease, honour - that he
desired of it in his youth; solitude is the gift his fellow men present to
him; let him live where he will, he will always find there the desert
and the cave. Let him see to it that he does not become subjugated,
*la Trappe: monastery from which the Trappist order takes its name.
that he does not become depressed and melancholic. And to that
end let him surround himself with pictures of good and brave
fighters, such as Schopenhauer was. But the second danger which
threatened Schopenhauer is not altogether rare, either. Here and
there a man is equipped by nature with mental acuteness, his
thoughts like to do the dialectical double-step; how easy it is, if he
carelessly lets go the reins of his talent, for him to perish as a human
being and to lead a ghostly life in almost nothing but 'pure
science'; or, grown accustomed to seeking the for and against in
all things, for him to lose sight of truth altogether and then be
obliged to live without courage or trust, in denial and doubt,
agitated and discontented, half hopeful, expecting to be disappointed:
'No dog would go on living like this!"Ǵ The third danger is that of
petrifaction, in the moral or the intellectual sphere; a man severs the
bonds that tied him to his ideal; he ceases to be fruitful, to propagate
himself, in this or that domain; in a cul'tural sense he becomes feeble
or useless. The uniqueness of his being has become an indivisible,
uncommunicating atom, an icy rock. ǵnd thus one can be reduced
to ruin by this uniqueness just as well as by the fear of it, by oneself as
well as by surrender of oneself, by longing as well as by petrifaction:
and to live at all means to live in danger.
Besides these constitutional dangers to which Schopenhauer
would have been exposed in whatever century he had lived, there
are also dangers which arose from his age; and this distinction be­
tween constitutional dangers and those proceeding from the age he
lived in is essential for an understanding of what is exemplary and
educative in Schopenhauer's nature. Let us think of the philosopher's
eye resting upon existence: he wants to determine its value anew. For
it has been the proper task of all great thinkers to be lawgivers as to
the measure, stamp and weight of things. How it must obstruct him
if the mankind most immediate to him is a feeble and worm-eaten
fruit! How much allowance he has to make for the valuelessness of
his time if he is to be just to existence as a whole! If occupation with
the history of past or foreign nations is of any value, it is of most value
to the philosopher who wants to arrive at a just verdict on the whole
fate of man - not, that is, only on the average fate but above all on the
highest fate that can befall individual men or entire nations. But
everything contemporary is importunate; it affects and directs the
eye even when the philosopher does not want it to; and in the total
# Quoted from Goethe's Faust, Part I Scene 1 .
1 44
Schopenhauer as educator
accounting it will involuntarily be appraised too high. That is why,
when he compares his own age with other ages, the philosopher
must deliberately under-assess it and, by overcoming the present in
himself, also overcome it in the picture he gives of life, that is to say
render it unremarkable and as it were paint it over. This is a difficult,
indeed hardly achievable task. The verdict of the philosophers of
ancient Greece on the value of existence says so much more than a
modern verdict does because they had life itself before and around
them in luxuriant perfection and because, unlike us, their minds
were not confused by the discord between the desire for freedom,
beauty, abundance of life on the one hand and on the other the drive
to truth, which asks only: what is existence worth as such? It will
always be worth knowing what Empedocles, living as he did in the
midst of the most vigorous and exuberant vitality of Greek culture,
had to say about existence; his verdict possesses great weight,
especially as it is not contradicted by a counter-verdict from any
other great philosopher of the same great era. He speaks the most
dearly, but essentially - that is if we listen carefully - they are all sayiflg
the same thing. A modern thinker will, to repeat, always suffer from
an unfulfilled desire: he will want first to be shown life again, true,
red-blooded, healthy life, so that he may then pronounce his judg­
ment on it. To himself at least he will regard it as necessary that he
should be a living human being if he is to believe he can be a just
judge. This is the reason it is precisely the more modern
philosophers who are among the mightiest promoters of life, of the
will to live, and why from out of their own exhausted age they long
for a culture, for a transfigured physis. But this longing also con­
stitutes their danger: there is a struggle within them between the
reformer of life and the philosopher, that is to say the judge of life.
Wherever the victory may indine, it is a victory that will involve a
loss. And how, then, did Schopenhauer elude this danger too?
If it is commonly accepted that the great man is the genuine child
of his age, if he in any event suffers from the deficiencies of his age
more acutely than do smaller men, then a struggle by such a great
man against his age seems to be only a senseless and destructive
attack on himself. But only seems so; for he is contending against
those aspects of his age that prevent him from being great, which
means, in his case, being free and entirely himself. From which it
follows that his hostility is at bottom directed against that which,
though he finds it in himself, is not truly himself: against the in­
decent compounding and confusing of things eternally incompat-
1 45
ible, against the soldering of time-bound things on to his own
untimeliness; and in the end the supposed child of his time proves to
be only its stepchild. Thus Schopenhauer strove from his early youth
against that false, idle and unworthy mother, his age, and by as it
were expelling her from him, he healed and purified his being and
rediscovered himself in the health and purity native to him. That is
why Schopenhauer's writings can be used as a mirror of his age; and
it is certainly not due to a fault in the mirror if everything time­
bound in his age appears as a disfiguring illness, as thin and pale, as
enervated and hollow eyed, as the recognizable sufferings of his
stepchildhood. The longing for a stronger nature, for a healthier and
simpler humanity, was in his case a longing for himself; and when he
had conquered his age in himselfhe beheld with astonished eyes the
genius in himself. The secret of his being was now revealed to him,
the intention of his stepmother age to conceal his genius from him
was frustrated, the realm of transfigured physis was disclosed. When
he now turned his fearless eye upon the question: 'What is life worth
as such?' - it was no longer a confused aoo pallid age and its hypo­
critical, uncertain life upon which he had to pass judgment. He knew
well that there is something higher and purer to be found and
attained on this earth than the life of his own time, and that he who
knows existence only in this ugly shape, and assesses it accordingly,
does it a grave injustice. No, genius itself is now summoned, so that
one may hear whether genius, the highest fruit of life, can perhaps
justify life as such; the glorious, creative human being is now to
answer the question: 'Do you affirm this existel1ce in the depths of
your heart? Is it sufficient for you? Would you be its advocate, its
redeemer? For you have only to pronounce a single heartfelt Yes!
and life, though it faces such heavy accusations, shall go free.' - What
answer will he give? - The answer of Empedocles.
This last remark may be allowed to remain incomprehensible for the
moment: for I have now to deal with something extremely com­
prehensible, namely to explain how through Schopenhauer we are
all able to educate ourselves against our age- because through him we
possess the advantage of really knowing this age. Supposing, that is,
that it is an advantage! In any event, it may no longer be possible a
couple of centuries hence. I find it amusing to reflect on the idea that
mankind may sometime soon grow tired of reading and that writers
1 46
Schopenhauer as educator
will do so too, that the scholar will one day direct in his last will and
testament that his corpse shall be buried surrounded by his books
and especially by his own writings. And ifit is true that the forests are
going to get thinner and thinner, may the time not come one day
when the libraries should be used for timber, straw and brushwood?
Since most books are born out of smoke and vapour of the brain,
they ought to return to smoke and vapour. And if they have no fire of
their own in them, fire should punish them for it. It is thus possible
that a later century will regard our era as a saeculum obscurum, *
because its productions have been used most abundantly for heating
the stoves. How fortunate we are, therefore, that we are still able to
know this age. For if concerning oneself with one's own age makes
any sense at all, then it is a good thing to concern oneself with it as
thoroughly as possible, so as to leave absolutely no doubt as to its
nature: and it is precisely this that Schopenhauer enables us to
do.
Of course, it would be a hundred times better if this investigation
should reveal that nothing so proud and full of hope as our own age
has ever before existed. And there are indeed at this moment naive
people in this and that corner of the earth, in Germany for instance,
who are prepared to believe such a thing, and even go so far as to
assert in all seriousness that the world was put to rights a couple of
years agot and thatthose who persist in harbouring dark misgivings
about the nature of existence are refuted by the 'facts'. The chief fact
is that the founding of the new German Reich is a decisive and
annihilating blow to all 'pessimistic' philosophizing
that is sup­
posed to be firm and certain. - Whoever is seeking to answer the
question of what the philosopher as educator can mean in our time
has to contest this view, which is very widespread and is propagated
especially in our universities; he must declare: it is a downright scandal
that such nauseating, idolatrous flattery can be rendered to our time
by supposedly thinking and honourable men - a proof that one no
longer has the slightest notion how different the seriousness of
philosophy is from the seriousness of a newspaper. Such men have
lost the last remnant not only of a philosophical but also of a
religious mode of thinking, and in their place have acquired not
even optimism but journalism, the spirit and spiritlessness of our
day and our daily papers. Every philosophy which believes that the
problem of existence is touched on, not to say solved, by a political
"" Saeculum obscurum: .  dark age
ti. e. with the founding of the Reich in 1 87 1 .
1 47
event is a joke- and pseudo-philosophy. Many states have been
founded since the world began; that is an old story. How should a
political innovation suffice to turn men once and for all into con­
tented inhabitants of the earth? But if anyone really does believe in
this possibility he ought to come forward, for he truly deserves to
become a professor of philosophy at a German university, like
Harms in Berlinƭ Jiirgen Meyer in Bonn and Carriere in Munich.
Here, however, we are experiencing the consequences of the doc­
trine, lately preached from all the rooftops, that the state is the
highest goal of mankind and that a man has no higher duty than to
serve the state: in which doctrine I recognize a relapse not into
paganism but into stupidity. It may be that a man who sees his
highest duty in serving the state really knows no higher duties; but
there are men and duties existing beyond this - and one of the duties
that seems, at least to me, to be higher than serving the state
demands that one destroys stupidity in every form, and therefore in
this form too. That is why I am concerned here with a species of man
whose teleology extends somewhat beyond the welfare of a state,
with philosophers, and with these only in relation to a world which is
again fairly independent of the welfare of a state, that of culture. Of
the many rings which, interlocked together, make up the human
community, some are of gold and others of pinchbeck.
N ow, how does the philosopher view the culture of our time? Very
differently, to be sure, from how it is viewed by those professors of
philosophy who are so well contented with their new state. When he
thinks of the haste and hurry now universal, of the increasing
. velocity oflife, of the cessation of all contemplativeness and simplicity,
he almost thinks that what he is seeing are the symptoms of a total
extermination and uprooting of culture. The waters of religion are
ebbing away and leaving behind swamps or stagnant pools; the
nations are again drawing away from one another in the most hostile
fashion and long to tear one another to pieces. The sciences, pur­
sued without any restraint and in a spirit of the blindest laissez. taiTe,
are shattering and dissolving all firmly held belief; the educated
classes and states are being swept along by a hugely contemptible
money economy. The world has never been more worldly, never
poorer in love and goodness. The educated classes are no longer
lighthouses or refuges in the midst of this turmoil of secularization;
they themselves grow daily more restless, thoughtless and loveless.
Everything, contemporary art and science included, serves the coming
. barbarism. The cultured man has degenerated to the greatest enemy
1 48
Schopenhauer as educator
of culture, for he wants lyingly to deny the existence of the universal
sickness and thus obstructs the physicians. They become incensed,
these poor wretches, whenever one speaks of their weakness and
resists their pernicious lying spirit. They would dearly like to make
us believe that of all the centuries theirs has borne the prize away,
and they shake with artificial merriment. Their way of hypocritically
simulating happiness sometimes has something touching about it,
because their happiness is something so completely incomprehen­
sible. One does not even feel like asking them what Tannhauser
asked Biterolf: 'What then, poor man, have you enjoyed?'* For ah!
we ourselves know better and know otherwise. A winter's day lies
upon us, and we dwell in high mountains, dangerously and in
poverty. Every joy is brief, and every ray of sunlight is pale that
creeps down to us on our white mountain. Music sounds, an old
man turns a barrel-organ, the dancers revolve - the wanderer is
deeply moved when he sees it: all is so wild, so taciturn, so colour­
less, so hopeless, and now there sounds within it a note of joy, of
sheer, unreflecting joy! But already the mists of early evening are
creeping in, the note dies away, the wanderer's step grates on the
ground; for as far as he can still see, he sees nothing but the cruel and
desolate face of nature.
If it may be one-sided to emphasize only the weakness of the
outlines and the dullness of the colours in the picture of modern life,
the other side of the picture is in no way more gratifying but oniy
mote disturbing. There are certainly forces there, tremendous forces,
but savage, primal and wholly merciless. One gazes upon them with
a fearful expectation, as though gazing into the cauldron of a witch's
kitchen: at any moment sparks and flashes may herald dreadful
apparitions. For a century we have been preparing for absolutely
fundamental convulsions; and if there have recently been attempts
to oppose this deepest of modern inclinations, to collapse or to
explode, with the constitutive power of the so-called nation state, the
latter too will for a long time serve only to augment the universal
insecurity and atmosphere of menace. That individuals behave as
though they knew nothing of all these anxieties does not mislead us:
their restlessness reveals how well they know of them; they think with
a precipitancy and with an exclusive preoccupation with themselves
never before encountered in man, they build and plant for their own
day alone, and the pursuit of happiness is never greater than when it
*In Wagner's Tannhiiuser, Act II.
1 49
has to be caught today or tomorrow: because perhaps by the day
after tomorrow there will be no more hunting at all. We live in the
age of atoms, of atomistic chaos. In the Middle Ages the hostile forces
were held together by the church and, through the strong pressure it
exerted, to some extent assimilated with one another. When the
bond broke, the pressure relaxed, they rebelled against one another.
The Reformation declared many things to be adiaphora, domains
where religion was not to hold sway; this was the price at which it
purchased its existence: just as Christianity had already had to pay a
similar price in face of the much more religiously inclined world of
antiquity. From there on the division spread wider and wider.
Nowadays the crudest and most evil forces, the egoism of the
money-makers and the military despots, hold sway over almost
everything on earth. In the hands of these despots and money­
makers, the state certainly makes an attempt to organize everything
anew out ofitself and to bind and constrain all those mutually hostile
forces: that is to say, it wants men to render it the same idolatry they
formerly rendered the church. With wlj.at success? We have still to
learn; we are, in any case, even now still in the ice-filled stream of the
Middle Ages; it has thawed and is rushing on with devastating
power. Ice-floe piles on ice-floe, all the banks have been inundated
and are in danger of collapse. The revolution is absolutely unavoid­
able, and it will be the atomistic revolution: but what are the smallest
indivisible basic constituents of human society?
It is incontestable that the spirit of humanity is almost in greater
danger during the approach of such eras than it is when they and the
chaotic turmoil they bring with them have actually arrived: the
anxiety of waiting and the greedy exploitation of every minute
brings forth all the cowardice and the self-seeking drives of the soul,
while the actual emergency, and especially a great universal
emergency, usually improves men and makes them more warm­
hearted. Who is there then, amid these dangers of our era, to guard
and champion humanity, the inviolable sacred treasure gradually
accumulated by the most various races? Who will set up the image of
man when all men feel in themselves only the self-seeking worm
and currish fear and have thus declined from that image to the
level of the animals or even of automata?
There are three images of man which our modern age has set up
one after the other and which will no doubt long inspire mortals to a
transfiguration of their own lives: they are the man of Rousseau, the
man of Goethe and finally the man of Schopenhauer. Of these, the
1 50
Schopenhauer as educator
first image possesses the greatest fire and is sure of producing the
greatest popular effect; the second is intended only for the few, for
contemplative natures in the grand style, and is misunderstood by
the crowd. The third demands contemplation only by the most
active men; only they can regard it without harm to themselves, for it
debilitates the contemplative and frightens away the crowd. From
the first there has proceeded a force which has promoted violent
revolutions and continues to do so; for in every socialist earthquake
and upheaval it has always been the man of Rousseau who, like
Typhon under Etna, is the cause of the commotion. Oppressed and
half crushed by arrogant upper classes and merciless wealth, ruined
by priests and bad education and rendered contemptible to himself
by ludicrous customs, man cries in his distress to 'holy nature' and
suddenly feels that it is as distant from him as any Epicurean god.
His prayers do not reach it, so deeply is he sunk in the chaos of
unnaturalness. Scornfully he throws from him all the gaudy finery
which only a short time before had seemed to him to constitute his
essential humanity, his arts and sciences, the advantages of a refined
life; he beats with his fists against the walls in whose shadow he has so
degenerated, and demands light, sun, forest and mountain. And
when he cries: 'Only nature is good, only the natural is human,' he
despises himself and longs to go beyond himself: a mood in which
the soul is ready for fearful decisions but which also calls up from its
depths what is noblest and rarest in it.
The man of Goethe is no such threatening power, indeed in a certain
sense he is the corrective and sedative for precisely those dangerous
excitations of which the man of Rousseau is the victim. In his youth
Goethe was himself a devotee of the gospel of nature with his whole
loving heart; his Faust was the highest and boldest reproduction of
the man of Rousseau, at any rate so far as concerns his ravenous
hunger for life, his discontent and longing, his traffic with the
demons of the heart. But then see what eventuates from this great
bank of clouds - certainly not lightning! And it is in precisely this that
there is revealed the new image of man, Goethean man. One would
think that Faust would be led through a life everywhere afflicted and
oppressed as an insatiable rebel and liberator, as the power that
denies out of goodness, as the actual religious and demonic genius
of subversion, in contrast to his altogether undemonic companion,
though he cannot get rid of this companion and has to employ and at
the same time despise his sceptical malice and denial - as is the tragic
fate of every rebel and liberator. But one is mistaken if one expects
1 5 1
anything of that kind; the man of Goethe here turns away from the
man of Rousseau; for he hates all violence, all sudden transition
but that means: all action; and thus the world-liberator becomes as it
were only a world-traveller. All the realms of life and nature, all the
past, all the arts, mythologies and sciences, see the insatiable spec­
tator fly past them, the deepest desires are aroused and satisfied,
even Helen does not detain him for very long - and then there must
come the moment for which his mocking companion is lying in wait.
At some suitable spot on earth his flight comes to an end, his wings
fall off, Mephistopheles is at hand. When the German ceases to be
Faust there is no greater danger than that he will become a philistine
and go to the Devil - heavenly powers alone can save him from it.
The man of Goethe is, as I have said, the contemplative man in the
grand style, who can avoid languishing away on earth only by bringing
together for his nourishment everything great and memorable that
has ever existed or still exists and thus lives, even though his life may
be a living from one desire to the next; he is not the man of action: on
the contrary, if he does ever become i member of any part of the
existing order established by the men of action one can be sure that
no good will come of it - Goethe's own enthusiastic participation in
the world of the theatre is a case in point - and, above all, that no
'order' will be overthrown. The Goethean man is a preservative and
conciliatory power - but with the danger, already mentioned, that he
may degenerate to a philistine, just as the man of Rousseau can easily
become a Catilinist. If the former had a little more muscle-power
and natural wildness, all his virtues would be greater. Goethe seems
to have realized where the danger and weakness of his type of man
lay, and he indicates it in the words of Jarno to Wilhelm Meister:
'You are vexed and bitter, that is very good; if only you would get
really angry for once it would be even better.'*
Thus, to speak frankly: it is necessary for us to get really angry for
once in order that things shall get better. And to encourage us to that
we have the Schopenhauerean image of man. The Schopenhauerean
man voluntarily takes upon himself the suffering involved in being truthful, and
this suffering serves to destroy his own wilfulness and to prepare that
complete overturning and conversion of his being, which it is the
real meaning of life to lead up to. This utterance of truth seems to
other men a discharge of malice, for they regard the conservation of
their inadequacies and humbug as a human duty and think that any-
*In Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre ( 1 795-6), Book 8.
1 52
Schopenhauer as educator
one who disrupts their child's play in this way must be wicked. They
are tempted to cry to such a man what Faust said to Mephistopheles:
'So to the eternal active and creative power you oppose the cold hand
of the Devil'; 'Ə and he who would live according to Schopenhauer
would probably seem more like a Mephistopheles than · a Faust -
s,eem, that is, to purblind modern eyes, which always see in denial
the mark of evil. But there is a kind of denying and destroying that is
the discharge of that mighty longing for sanctification and salvation
and as the first philosophical teacher of which Schopenhauer came
among us desanctified and truly secularized men. All that exists that
can be denied deserves to be denied; and being truthful means: to
believe in an existence that can in no way be denied and which is
itself true and without falsehood. That is why the truthful man feels
that the meaning of his activity is metaphysical, explicable through
the laws of another and higher life, and in the profoundest sense
affirmative: however much all that he does may appear to be de­
structive of the laws of this life and a crime against them. So it is that
all his acts must become an uninterrupted suffering; but he knows
what Meister Eckhart also knows: 'The beast that bears you fastest to
perfection is suffering.' I would think that anyone who sƐt such a
life's course before his soul must feel his heart open and a fierce
desire arise within him to be such a Schopenhauerean man: that is to
say, strangely composed about himself and his own welfare, in his
knowledge full of blazing, consuming fire and far removed from the
cold and contemptible neutrality of the so-called scientific man,
exalted high above all sullen and ill-humoured reflection, always
offering himself as the first sacrifice to perceived truth and per­
meated with the awareness of what sufferings must spring from his
truthfulness. He will, to be sure, destroy his earthly happiness
through his courage; he will have to be an enemy to those he loves
and to the institutions which have produced him; he may not spare
men or things, even though he suffers when they suffer; he will be
misunderstood and for long thought an ally of powers he abhors;
however much he may strive after justice he is bound, according to
the human limitations of his insight, to be unjust: but he may con­
sole himself with the words once employed by his great teacher,
Schopenhauer: 'A happy life is impossible: the highest that man can
attain to is a heroic one. He leads it who, in whatever shape or form,
struggles against great difficulties for something that is to the benefit
Cln Faust, Part I Scene 3.
1 53
of all and in the end is victorious, but who is ill-rewarded'for it or not
rewarded at all. Then, when he has done, he is turned to stone, like
the prince in Gozzi's Re coroo, but stands in a noble posture and with
generous gestures. He is remembered and is celebrated as a hero;
his will, mortified a whole life long by effort and labour, ill success
and the world's ingratitude, is extinguished in Nirvana.'* Such a
heroic life, to be sure, together with the mortification accomplished
in it, corresponds least of all to the paltry conception of those who
make the most noise about it, celebrate festivals to the memory of
great men, and believe that great men are great in the same way as
they are little, as it were through a gift and for their own satisfaction
or by a mechanical operation and in blind obedience to this inner
compulsion: so that he who has not received this gift, or does not feel
this compulsion, has the same right to be little as the other has to be
great. But being gifted or being compelled are contemptible words
designed to enable one to ignore an inner admonition, slanders on
him who has paid heed to this admonition, that is to say on the great
man; he least of all lets himself be given gijts or be compelled
he
knows as well as any little man how to take life easily and how soft the
bed is on which he could lie down ifhis attitude towards himself and
his fellow men were that of the majority: for the objective of all
human arrangements is through distracting one's thoughts to cease
to be aware oflife. Why does he desire the opposite
to be aware pre­
cisely oflife, that is to say to suffer from life - so strongly? Because he
realizes that he is in danger of being cheated out of himself, and that
a kind of agreement exists to kidnap him out of his own cave. Then
he bestirs himself, pricks up his ears, and resolves: '1 will remain my
own!' It is a dreadful resolve; only gradually does he grasp that fact.
For now he will have to descend into the depths of existence with a
string of curious questions on his lips: why do I live? what lesson have
I to learn from life? how have I become what I am and why do I suf­
fer from being what I am? He torments himself, and sees how no
one else does as he does, but how the hands of his fellow men are,
rather, passionately stretched out to the fantastic events portrayed in
the theatre of politics, or how they strut about in a hundred mas­
querades, as youths, men, greybeards, fathers, citizens, priests, of­
ficials, merchants, mindful solely of their collective comedy and
*From Schopenhauer's Parerga und Paralipomena: 'Nachtrage zur Lehre von der
Bt:iahung und Verneinung des Willens zum Leben'.
1 54
Schopenhauer as educator
not at all of themselves. To the question: 'To what end do you live?'
they would all quickly reply with pride: 'To become a good citizen, or
scholar, or statesman' - and yet they are something that can never
become something else, and why are they precisely this? And not,
alas, something better? He who regards his life as no Đore than a
point in the evolution of a race or of a state or of a science; and thus
regards himself as belonging wholly to the history of becoming,
has not understood the lesson set him by existence and will have to
learn it over again. This eternal becoming is a lying puppet-play
in beholding which man forgets himself, the actual distraction which
disperses the individual to the four winds, the endless stupid game
which the great child, time, plays before us and with us. That heroism
of truthfulness consists in one day ceasing to be the toy it plays with.
In becoming, everything is hollow, deceptive, shallow and worthy of
our contempt; the enigma which man is to resolve he can resolve
only in being, in being thus and not othelWise, in the imperishable.
Now he starts to test how deeply he is entwined with becoming, how
deeply with being - a tremendous task rises before his soul: to de­
stroy all that is becoming, to bring to light all that is false in things.
He too wants to know everything, but not, in the way the Goethean
man does, for the sake of a noble pliability, to preserve himself and
to take delight in the multiplicity of things; he himself is his first sac­
rifice to himself. The heroic human being despises his happiness
and his unhappiness, his virtues and vices, and in general the
measuring of things by the standard of himself; he hopes for nothing
more from himself and in all things he wants to see down to this
depth of hopelessness. His strength lies in forgetting himself; and if
he does think of himself he measures the distance between himself
and his lofty goal and seems to see behind and beneath him only an
insignificant heap of dross. The thinkers of old sought happiness
and truth with all their might - and what has to be sought shall never
be found, says nature's evil principle. But for him who seeks untruth
in everything and voluntarily allies himself with unhappiness a miracle
of disappointment of a different sort has perhaps been prepared:
something inexpressible of which happiness and truth are only
idolatrous counterfeits approaches him, the earth loses its gravity,
the events and powers of the earth become dreamlike, transfigur­
ation spreads itself about him as on summer evenings. To him đho
sees these things it is as though he were just beginning to awaken and
what is playing about him is only the clouds of a vanishing dream.
These too will at some time be wafted away: then it will be day. -
1 55
But I have undertaken to exhibit my experience ofSchopenhauer as
an educator, and it is thus not nearly sufficient for me to paint, and to
paint imperfectly, that ideal man who, as his Platonic ideal as it were,
holds sway in and around him. The hardest task still remains: to say
how a new circle of duties may be derived from this ideal and how
one can proceed towards so extravagant a goal through a practical
activity - in short, to demonstrate that this ideal educates. One might
otherwise think it nothing but an intoxicating vision granted us only
for moments at a time, and then leaving us all the more painfully in
the lurch and prey to an even deeper dissatisfaction. It is also indis­
putable that that is how we begin our association with this ideal -with
a sudden contrast of light and darkness, intoxication and nausea -
and that this is a repetition of an experience which is as old as ideals
themselves. But we ought not to stand long in the doorway, we ought
soon to get through the beginning. And so we have seriously to ask
the definite question: is it possible to bringOthat incredibly lofty goal
so close to us that it educates us while it draws us aloft? - that
Goethe's mighty words may not be fulfilled in us: 'Man is born to a
limited situation; he is able to understand simple, accessible,
definite goals, and he accustoms himself to employing the means
that happen to lie close at hand; but as soon as he oversteps his limits
he knows neither what he wants nor what he ought to do, and it is all
one whether he is distracted by the multiplicity of the things he
encounters or whether his head is turned by their loftiness and
dignity. It is always a misfortune when he is induced to strive after
something which he cannot proceed towards through self-initi­
ated and regulated activity. '* The Schopenhauerean man appears
to be singularly open to this objection: his dignity and loftiness
can only turn our heads and thereby exclude us from any partici­
pation in the world of action; coherent duties, the even flow of
life are gone. One man perhaps at last accustoms himself to living
discontentedly according to two different rules of conduct, that is
to say in conflict with himself, uncertain of how to act and there­
fore daily more feeble and unfruitful: while another may even
renounce all action on principle and almost cease to pay any
attention to the actions of others. The dangers are always great
when things are made too difficult for a man and when he is in-
LFrom Wilhelm. Meisters Leltrjahre, Book 6, 'Confession of a Beautiful Soul'.
1 56
Sclwpenhauer as educator
capable of fulfilling any duties at all; stronger natures can be
destroyed by it, the weaker, more numerous natures decline into a
reflective laziness and in the end forfeit through laziness even
their ability to reflect.
N ow, in face of such objections I am willing to concede that in pre­
cisely this respect our Ƙork has hardly begun and that from my own
experience I am sure of only one thing: that from that ideal image it
is possible to fasten upon ourselves a chain of fulfillable duties, and
that some of us already feel the weight of this chain. But before I can
conscientiously reduce this new circle of duties to a formula I must
offer the following preliminary observations.
More profoundly feeling people have at all times felt sympathy for
the animals because they suffer from life and yet do not possess the
power to turn the thorn of suffering against itself and to under­
stand their existence metaphysically; one is, indeed, profoundly
indignant at the sight of senseless suffering. That is why there has
arisen in more than one part of the earth the supposition that the
bodies of animals contain the guilt-laden souls of men, so that this
suffering which at first sight arouses indignation on account of its
senselessness acquires meaning and significance as punishment and
atonement before the seat of eternal justice. And it is, truly, a harsh
punishment thus to live as an animal, beset by hunger and desire yet
incapable of any kind of reflection on the nature of this life; and no
harder fate can be thought of than that of the beast of prey pursued
through the wilderness by the most gnawing torment" rarely satisfied
and even then in such a way that satisfaction is purchased only with
the pain of lascerating combat with other animals or through inor­
dinate greed and nauseating satiety. To hang on to life madly and
blindly, with no higher aim than to hang on to it; not to know that or
why one is being so heavily punished but, with the stupidity of a fear­
ful desire, to thirst after precisely this punishment as though after
happiness - that is what it means to be an animal; and if all nature
presses towards man, it thereby intimates that man is necessary for
the redemption of nature from the curse of the life of the animal, and
that in him existence at last holds up before itself a mirror in which
life appears no longer senseless but in its metaphysical significance.
Yet let us reflect: where does the animal cease, where does man
begin? - man, who is nature's sole concern! As long as anyone
desires life as he desires happiness he has not yet raised his eyes
above the horizon of the animal, for he only desires more con­
sciously what the animal seeks through blind impulse. But that is
1 57
what we all do for the greater part of our lives: usually we fail to
emerge out of animality, we ourselves are the animals whose suffering
seems to be senseless.
But there are moments when we realize this: then the clouds are rent
asunder, and we see that, in common with all nature, we are pressing
towards man as towards something that stands high above us. In this
sudden illumination we gaze around us and behind us with a shudder:
we behold the more subtle beasts of prey and there we are in the
midst of them. The tremendous coming and going of men on the
great wilderness of the earth. their founding of cities and states, their
wars, their restless assembling and scattering again, their confused
mingling, mutual imitation, mutual outwitting and down treading,
their wailing in distress, their howls of joy in victory- all this is a con­
tinuation of animality: as though man was to be deliberately retro­
gressed and defrauded of his metaphysical disposition, indeed as
though nature, after having desired and worked at man for so long,
now drew back from him in fear and preferred to return to the
unconsciousness of instinct. Nature ieeds knowledge and it is
terrified of the knowledge it has need of; and so the flame flickers
restlessly back and forth as though afraid of itself and seizes upon a
thousand things before it seizes upon that on account of which
nature needs knowledge at all. In individual moments we all know
how the most elaborate arrangements of our life are made only so as
to flee from the tasks we actually ought to be performing, how we
would like to hide our head somewhere as though our hundred­
eyed conscience could not find us out there, how we hasten to give
our heart to the state, to money-making, to sociability or science
merely so as no longer to possess it ourselves, how we labour at our
daily work more ardently and thoughtlessly than is necessar;y to sus­
tain our life because to us it is even more necessary not to have
leisure to stop and think. Haste is universal because everyone is in
flight from himself; universal too is the shy concealment of this haste
because everyone wants to seem content and would" like to deceive
more sharp-eyed observers as to the wretchedness he feels; and also
universal is the need for new tinkling word-bells to hang upon life
and so bestow upon it an air of noisy festivity. Everyone is familiar
with the strange condition in which unpleasant memories suddenly
assert themselves and we then make great efforts, through vehement
noise and gestures, to banish them from our minds: but the noise
and gestures which are going on everywhere reveal that we are all in
such a condition all the time, that we live in fear of memory and of
1 58
Sdwpenhauer as educator
turning inward. But what is it that assails us so frequently, what is the
gnat that will not let us sleep? There are spirits all around us, every
moment of our life wants to say something to us, but we refuse to listen
to these spirit-voices. We are afraid that when we are alone and quiet
something will be whispered into our ear, and so we-hate quietness
and deafen ourselves with sociability.
Now and again, as already said, we realize all this, and are amazed
at all this vertiginous fear and haste and at the whole dreamlike con­
dition in which we live, which seems to have a horror of awakening
and dreams the more vividly and restlessly the closer it is to this
awakening. But we feel at the same time that we are too weak to
endure those moments of profoundest contemplation for very long
and that we are not the mankind towards which all nature presses for
its redemption: it is already much that we should raise our head
above the water at all, even if only a little, and observe what stream it
is in which we are so deeply immersed. And even this momentary
emerging and awakening is not achieved through our own power,
we have to be lifted up - and who are they who lift us?
They are those true men, those who are no longer animal, the philosophers,
artists and saints; nature, which never makes a leap, has made its one
leap in creating them, and a leap of joy moreover, for nature then
feels that for the first time it has reached its goal - where it realizes it
has to unlearn having goals and that it has played the game of life
and becoming with too high stakes. This knowledge transfigures
nature, and a gentle evening-weariness, that which men call 'beauty',
reposes upon its face. That which it now utters with this transfigured
countenance is the great enlightenment as to the character of existence;
and the supreme wish that mortals can wish is lastingly and with
open ears to participate in this enlightenment. If we think of how
much Schopenhauer for instance must have heard during the course
of his life, then we might well say to ourselves afterwards: 'Alas, your
deaf ears, your dull head, your flickering understanding, your
shrivelled heart, all that I call mine, how I despise you! Not to be able
to fly, only to flutter! To see what is above you but not to be able to
reach it! To know the way that leads to the immeasurable open pros­
pect of the philosopher, and almost to set foot on it, but after a few
steps to stagger back! And if that greatest of all wishes were fulfilled
for only a day, how gladly one would exchange for it all the rest of
life! To climb as high into the pure icy Alpine air as a philosopher
ever climbed, up to where all the mist and obscurity cease and where
the fundamental constitution of things speaks in a voice rough and
1 59
D ..
1'[
rigid but ineluctably comprehensible! Merely to think of this makes
the soul infinitely solitary; if its wish were fulfilled, however, if its
glance once fell upon things straight and bright as a beam oflight, if
shame, fear and desire died away
what word could then describe
the condition it would be in, that new and enigmatic animation
without agitation with which it would, like the soul ofSchopenhauer,
lie extended over the tremendous hieroglyphics of existence, over
the petrified doctrine of becoming, not as the darkness of night but
as the glowing light of dawn streaming out over all the world. And
what a fate, on the other hand, to sense sufficient of the certainty and
happiness of the philosopher to be able to feel the whole uncertainty
and unhappiness of the non-philosopher, of him who desires
without hope! To know oneself a fruit on the tree which can never
become ripe because one;s too much in the shadow, and at the same
time to see close at hand the sunshine that one lacks!'
There is enough torment here to make a man who is mis-talented
in such a way malicious and envious, if he is capable of malice and
envy at all; probably, however, he will atAast turn his soul in another
direction so that it shall not consume itself in vain longing - and now
he will discover a new circle of duties.
Here 1 have arrived at an answer to the question whether it is poss­
ible to pursue the great ideal of the Schopenhauerean man by means
of a practical activity. One thing above all is certain: these new duties
are not the duties of a solitary; on the contrary, they set one in the
midst of a mighty community held together, not by external forms
and regulations, but by a fundamental idea. It is the fundamental
idea of culture, insofar as it sets for each one of us but one task: to promote
the production of the philosophe0 the artist and the saint within us and without
us and thereby to work at the perfecting of nature. For, as nature needs the
philosopher, so does it need the artist, for the achievement of a
metaphysical goal, that of its own self-enlightenment, so that it may
at last behold as a clear and finished picture that which it could see
only obscurely in the agitation of its evolution
for the end, that is to
say, of self-knowledge. It was Goethe who declared, in an arrogant
but profound assertion, that nature's experiments are of value only
when the artist finally comes to comprehend its stammerings, goes
out to meet it halfway, and gives expression to what all these experi­
ments are really about. 'I have often said', he once exclaimed, 'and 1
shall often repeat, that the causa finalis of the activities of men and the
world is dramatic poetry. For the stuff is of absolutely no other use.'
And so nature at last needs the saint, in whom the ego is completely
1 60
Sclwpenhauer as educator
melted away and whose life of suffering is no longer felt as his own
life - or is hardly so felt - but as a profound feeling of oneness and
identity with all living things: the saint in whom there appears that
miracle of transformation which the game of becoming never hits
upon, that final and supreme becoming-human after which all
nature presses and urges for its redemption from itself. It is incon­
testable that we are all related and allied to the saint, just as we are
related to the philosopher and artist; there are moments and as it
were bright sparks of the fire of love in whose light we cease to
understand the word 'I', there lies something beyond our being
which at these moments moves across into it, and we are thus
possessed of a heartfelt longing for bridges between here and there.
I t is true that, as we usually are, we can contribute nothing to the pro­
duction of the man of redemption: that is why we hate ourselves as we
usually are, and it is this hatred which is the root of that pessimism
which Schopenhauer had again to teach our age, though it has existed
for as long as the longing for culture has existed. Its root, not its
flower; its bottom floor, so to speak, not its roof; the commencement
of its course, not its goal: for at some time or other we shall have to
learn to hate something else, something more universal, and cease
to
hate our own individuality and its wretched limitations,
changeableness and restlessness: it will be in that elevated condition
in which we shall also love something else, something we are now
unable to love. Only when, in our present or in some future incar­
nation, we ourselves have been taken into that exalted - order of
philosophers, artists and saints, shall we also be given a new goal for
our love and hate - in the meantime we have our task and our circle
of duties, our hate and our love. For we know what culture is.
Applied to the Schopenhauerean man, it demands that we prepare
and promote his repeated production by getting to know what is
inimical to it and removing it - in short, that we unwearyingly com­
bat that which would deprive us of the supreme fulfilment of our
existence by preventing us from becoming such Schopenhauerean
men ourselves. -
Sometimes it is harder to accede to a thing than it is to see its truth;
and that is how most people may feel when they reflect on the pro­
position: 'Mankind must work continually at the production of
individual great men
that and nothing else is its task.' How much
1 6 1
one would like to apply to society and its goals something that can be
learned from observation of any species of the animal or plant
world: that its only concern is the individual higher exemplar, the
more uncommon, more powerful, more complex, more fruitful
how much one would like to do this if inculcated fancies as to the
goal of society did not offer such tough resistance! We ought really to
have no difficulty in seeing that, when a species has arrived at its
limits and is about to go over into a higher species, the goal of its
evolution lies, not in the mass of its exemplars and their wellbeing,
let alone in those exemplars who happen to come last in point of
time, but rather in those apparently scattered and chance existences
which favourable conditions have here and there produced; and it
ought to be just as easy to understand the demand that, because it
can arrive at a conscious awareness of its goal, mankind ought to
seek out and create the favourable conditions under which those
great redemptive men can come into existence. But everything
resists this conclusion: here the ultimate goal is seen to lie in the hap­
piness of all or of the greatest number, th;re in the development of
great communities; and though one may be ready to sacrifice one's
life to a state, for instance, it is another matter if one is asked to sac­
rifice it on behalf of another individual. It seems to be an absurd
demand that one man should exist for the sake of another man; 'for
the sake of all others, rather, or at least for as many as possible!' 0
worthy man! as though it were less absurd to let number decide
when value and significance are at issue! For the question is this: how
can your life, the individual life, receive the highest value, the
.deepest significance? How can it be least squandered? Certainly
only by your living for the good of the rarest and most valuable
exemplars, and not for the good of the majority, that is to say those
who, taken individually, are the least valuable exemplars. And the
young person should be taught to regard himself as a failed work of
nature but at the same time as a witness to the grandiose and mar­
vellous intentions of this artist: nature has done badly, he should say
to himself; but 1 will honour its great intentions by serving it so that
one day it may do better.
By coming to this resolve he places himself within the circle of cul­
ture; for culture is the child of each individual's self-knowledge and
dissatisfaction with himself. Anyone who believes in culture is
thereby saying: 'I see above me something higher and more human
than 1 am; let everyone help me to attain it, as 1 will help everyone
. who knows and suffers as 1 do: so that at last the man may appear
who feels himself perfect and boundless in knowledge and love, per-
Schopenhauer as educator
ception and power, and who in his completeness is at one with
nature, the judge and evaluator of things.' It is hard to create in any­
one this condition of intrepid self-knowledge because it is im­
possible to teach love; for it is love alone that can bestow on the soul,
not only a clear, discriminating and self-contemptuous view of itself,
but also the desire to look beyond itself and to seek with all its might
for a higher self as yet still concealed from it. Thus only he who has
attached his heart to some great man receives thereby the fi1'St con­
secration to cultu're; the sign of that consecration is that one is
ashamed of oneself without any accompanying feeling of distress,
that one comes to hate one's own narrowness and shrivelled
nature, that one has a feeling of sympathy for the genius who
again and again drags himself up out of our dryness and apathy
and the same feeling in anticipation for all those who are still
struggling and evolving, with the profoundest conviction that
almost everywhere we encounter nature pressing towards man
and again and again failing to achieve him, yet everywhere suc­
ceeding in producing the most marvellous beginnings, individual
traits and forms: so that the men we live among resemble a field
over which is scattered the most precious fragments of sculpture
where everything calls to us: come, assist, complete, bring to­
gether what belongs together, we have an immeasurable longing
to become whole.
This sum of inner states is, I said, the first consecration to
culture; I now have to describe the effects of the second consecra­
tion, and I realize that here my task is more difficult. For now we
have to make the transition from the inward event to an assess­
ment of the outward event; the eye has to be directed outwards so
as to rediscover in the great world of action that desire_ for culture
it recognized in the experiences of the first stage just described;
the individual has to employ his own wrestling and longing as
the alphabet by means of which he can now read off the aspira­
tions of mankind as a whole. But he may not halt even here;
from this stage he has to climb up to a yet higher one; culture
demands of him, not only inward experience, not only an assess­
ment of the outward world that streams all around him, but fin­
ally and above all . an act, that is to say a struggle on behalf of
culture and hostility towards those influences, habits, laws, institu­
tions in which he fails to recognize his goal: which is the produc­
tion of the genius.
He who is capable of raising himself to this second stage is snuck
first of all by how extraordinarily sjlane and -rare knowledge of this goal is,
how universal, by contrast, cultural endeavour is and what an
unspeakable amount of energy is expended in its service. One asks
oneself in amazement: is such knowledge perhaps completely
unnecessary? Does nature attain its goal even when the m·ajority
misunderstand the objective of their endeavours? He who has
accustomed himself to thinking highly of the unconscious pur­
posefulness of nature will perhaps experience no difficulty in replying:
'Yes, that is how it is! Men may reflect and argue about their ultimate
goal as much as they like, in the obscure impulse in the depths of
them they are well aware of the rightful path.' To be able to con­
tradict this, one must have experienced certain things; but he who
really is convinced that the goal of culture is to promote the pro­
duction of true human beings and nothing else, and then sees how
even now, with all our expenditure and pomp of culture, the pro­
duction of such human beings is hardly to be distinguished from
cruelty to animals protracted into the human world, will think it very
necessary finally to replace that 'obscure impulse' with a conscious
willing. And he will think so especiall)t for a second reason: that it
shall cease to be possible for that drive which does not know its goal,
that celebrated obscure impulse, to be employed for quite different
objectives and directed on to paths which can never lead to the su­
preme goal, the production of the genius. For there exists a species
of misemployed and appropriated culture
you have only to look around
you! And precisely those forces at present most actively engaged in
promoting culture do so for reasons they reserve to themselves and
not out of pure disinterestedness.
Among these forces is, first of all, the greed of the money-makers, which
requires the assistance of culture and by way of thanks assists culture
in return, but at the same time, of course, would like to dictate its
standards and objectives. It is from this quarter that there comes that
favourite proposition and chain of conclusions which goes some­
thing like this: as much knowledge and education as possible,
therefore as much demand as possible, therefore as much production
as possible, therefore as much happiness and profit as possible- that
is the seductive formula. Education would be defined by its
adherents as the insight by means of which, through demand and its.
satisfaction, one becomes time-bound through and through but at
the same time best acquires all the ways and means of making
money as easily as possible. The goal would then be to create as
many current human beings as possible, in the sense in which one
speaks of a coin as being current; and, according to this conception,
1 64
Schopenhauer as educator
the more of these current human beings it possesses the happier a
nation will be. Thus the sole intention behind our modern
educational institutions should be to assist everyone to become
current to the extent that lies in his nature, to educate everyone in
such a way that they can employ the degree of knowledge and learning
of which they are capable for the accumulation of the greatest possible
amount of happiness and profit. What is demanded here is that the
individual must be able, with the aid of this general education, exactly
to assess himself with regard to what he has a right to demand oflife;
and it is asserted, finally, that there exists a natural and necessary
connection between 'intelligence and property', between 'wealth
and culture', more, that this connection is a moral necessity. Here
there is a hatred of any kind of education that makes one a solitary,
that proposes goals that transcend money and money-making, that
takes a long time; such more serious forms of education are usually
disparaged as 'refined egoism' and as 'immoral cultural Epicureanism'.
Precisely the opposite of this is, of course, held in esteem by the
morality that here counts as valid: namely, a speedy education so
that one may quickly become a money-earning being, yet at the
same time an education sufficiently thorough to enable one to earn a
very great deal of money. A man is allowed only as much culture as it
is in the interest of general money-making and world commerce he
should possess, but this amount is likewise demanded of him. In
short: 'Man has a claim to earthly happiness and for that reason he
needs education, but only for that reason!'
Secondly, there is the greed of the state, which likewise desires the
greatest possible dissemination and universalization of culture and
has in its hands the most effective instruments for satisfying this
desire. Presupposing it knows itself sufficiently strong to be able, not
only to unchain energies, but at the right time also to yoke them, pre­
supposing its foundations are sufficiently broad and secure to sus­
tain the whole educational structure, then the dissemination of
education among its citizens can only be to its advantage in its com­
petition with other states. Whenever one now speaks of the 'cultural
state', one sees it as facing the task of releasing the spiritual energies
of a generation to the extent that will serve the interests of existing
institutions: but only to this extent; as a forest river is partially diverted
with dams and breakwaters so as to operate a mill with the
diminished driving-power thus produced - while the river's full
driving-power would rather endanger the mill than operate it. This
releasing of energies is at the same time, and much more, an
1 65
I:
L
1 1
enchaining of them. One has only to recall what Christianity has
gradually become through the greed of the state. Christianity is cer­
tainly one of the purest revelations of the impulse to culture and
especially of the impulse to the ever-renewed production of the
saint; but since it has been employed in a hundred ways to propel the
mills of state power it has gradually become sick to the very marrow,
hypocritical and untruthful, and degenerated into a contradiction of
its original goal. Even the most recent event in its history, the German
Reformation, would have been no more than a sudden and quickly
extinguished flare-up if it had not stolen fresh fuel from the fires of
conflict between the states.
Thirdly, culture is promoted by all those who are conscious of
possessing an ugly or boring content and want to conceal the fact with
so-called 'beautifu1fonn' . Under the presupposition that what is inside
is usually judged by what is outside, the observer is to be constrained
to a false assessment of the content through externalities, through
words, gestures, decoration, display, ceremoniousness. It some­
times seems to me that modern men b.l)re one another to a bound­
less extent and that they finally feel the need to make themselves
interesting with the aid of all the arts. They have themselves served
up by their artists as sharp and pungent repasts; they soak them­
selves in all the spices of the Orient and the Occident, and to be sure!
they now smell very interesting, smelling as they do of all the Orient
and the Occident. Now they are suitably prepared for satisfying
every taste; and everyone shall have something, whether his incli­
nation be for the fresh-smelling or foul-smelling, for the sublimated
or for peasant coarseness, for the Greek or the Chinese, for tragedies
or for dramatized lewdness. The most celebrated chefs for these
modern men who want to be interesting and interested at any cost
are, as is well known, to be found among the French, the worst
among the Germans. At bottom this fact is more consoling to the latter
than to the former, and let us not hold it against the French in the
least if they mock at us precisely because we are uninteresting and
lack elegance and if, when individual Germans desire to be suave
and elegant, it reminds them of the Indian who wanted a ring
through his nose and demanded to be tattoQed.
- And here I shall make a digression. Since the late war with
France there have been many changes in Germany and it is clear that
the return to peace has also brought with it certain new demands in
regard to German culture. The war was for many their first visit to
the more elegant half of the world; how unprejudiced the victor now
1 66
Sclwpenhauer as educator
appears when he does not disdain to acquire a little culture from the
vanquished! Handicrafts especially are repeatedly invited to com­
pete with the more cultivated neighbour, the fitting-out of the Gennan
house is to be made similar to that of the French, even the' Gennan
language is, through the foundation of an academy after the French
model, to acquire 'sound taste' and rid itself of the questionable
influence supposedly exerted upon it by Goethe
a view expressed
quite recently by the Berlin academician Dubois-Reymond. Our
theatres have for long been quietly and with due decorum aspiring
towards the same goal, even the elegant Gennan scholar has already
been invented: so that we can expect that everything that has up to
now refused to conform to the law of elegance - German music,
tragedy and philosophy - will henceforth be set aside as un-Gennan.
- But truly, Gennan culture would not be worth lifting a finger for if
the Gennan understood by the culture he still lacks and is to aspire
to, nothing but arts and artifices for prettifying life, including all the
ingenuities of the dancing-master and the wallpaper-hanger, ifin the
matter of language too he was concerned only with academically
approved rules and a certain general polish. The late war and self­
comparison with the French seem, however, hardly to have evoked
any higher pretentions than these; on the contrary, I am often
assailed by the suspicion that the Gennan now wants violently to cast
off those ancient obligations which his wonderful talentedness and
the profound seriousness of his nature imposed upon him. He pre­
fers to play monkey-tricks and to learn the arts and manners that
make life entertaining. But there can be no more grievous slander
against the German spirit than to treat it as though it were wax to be
moulded in any way one pleases and thus also into a semblance of
elegance. And if it is unfortunately true that a good proportion of the
German nation is only too willing to be-moulded and kneaded into
shape in this fashion, then one has to reiterate until the words are
heeded: it no longer dwells in you, that ancient German nature
which, though hard, austere and full of resistance, is so as the most
precious of materials, upon which only the greatest of sculptors are
pennitted to work because they alone are worthy of it. What you
have in you, on the contrary, is soft, pulpy matter; make with it what
you will, form it into elegant dolls and interesting idols - here too the
words of Richard Wagner will hold true: 'The German is angular and
clumsy when he affects polish and politeness; but he is sublime and
superior to everyone when he catches fire.' And the elegant have
every reason to beware of this German fire, or one day it may con-
---, I
sume them together with all their dolls and idols of wax. - One
could, to be sure, derive that inclination for 'beautiful form' now get­
ting the upper hand in Germany from other and deeper sources:
from the prevailing haste, from the breathless grasping at every
moment, from the precipitation that plucks all things from the
bough too soon, from the race and pursuit that nowadays carves
furrows in men's faces and as it were covers all they do with tattoos.
As though a potion that prevents them from catching their breath
were working within them, they storm ahead with indecent anxiety
as the harassed slaves of the moment, opinion and fashion: so that
the lack of dignity and decorum is indeed all too painfully evident
and a deceitful elegance required to mask the 'sickness of this
undignified haste. For that is how the fashionable greed for beautiful
form is connected with the ugly content of contemporary man: the
former is intended to conceal, the latter to be concealed. To be
cultivated means: to hide from oneself how wretched and base one
is, how rapacious in going for what one wants, hǬw insatiable in
heaping it up, how shameless and selfislt in enjoying it. When I have
in the past pointed out to someone that a German culture does not
exist, more than once I have received the reply: 'But that is quite
natural, for hitherto the Germans have been too poor and modest.
Just let our compatriots become rich and self-confident, and then
they will possess a culture too!' Though belief may make blessed, this
kind of belief has the opposite effect on me, because I feel that the
German culture which is here believed to possess a future- a culture
of wealth, polish and feigned gentility - is the most hostile antithesis
of the German culture in which I believe. Certainly, he who has to
live among Germans suffers greatly from the notorious greyness of
their life and thought, from their formlessness, their stupidity and
dull-mindedness, their coarseness in more delicate affairs, even
more from their envy and a certain secretiveness and uncleanliness
in their character; he is pained and offended by their rooted joy in
what is false and ungenuine, in bad imitations, in the translation of
good foreign things into bad native ones: now, however, that one has
in addition, and as the most painful experience of all, their feverish
restlessness, their search for success and profit, their overestimation
of the moment, one is limitlessly indignant to think that all these
maladies and weaknesses are on principle never to be cured but only
painted over - with a 'culture of interesting form'! And this in the
case of a nation which produced Schopenhauer and Wagner! And ought
to do so often again! Or are we desperately deceiving ourselves? Do
1 68
Schopenhauer as educator
those named perhaps no longer offer any guarantee whatever that
such energies as theirs still exist in the German mind and spirit? Are
they themselves exceptions, as it were the last tendrils of qualities
formerly regarded as German? I admit I am here nonplussed, and
thus I return to the path of more general reflection from which my
anxious doubts often seek to divert me. I have not yet numbered all
those powers which, though they demand culture, do so without
recognizing the goal of culture, the production of the genius; three
have been named: the greed of the money-makers, the greed of the
state, and the greed of all those who have reason to disguise them­
selves behind form. I name fourthly the greed of the sciences and the
characteristic qualities of their servants, the men of learning.
Science is related to wisdom as virtuousness is related to holiness;
it is cold and dry, it has not love and knows nothing of a deep feel­
ing of inadequacy and longing. It is as useful to itself as it is hannful
to its servants, insofar as it transfers its own character to them and
thereby ossifies their humanity. As long as what is meant by cul­
ture is essentially the promotion of science, culture will pass the
great suffering human being by with pitiless coldness, because sci­
ence sees everywhere only problems of knowledge and because
within the world of the sciences suffering is really something im­
proper and incomprehensible, thus at best only one more problem.
But if one accustoms oneself to translating every experience into a
dialectical question-and-answer game and into an affair purely of
the head, it is astonishing in how short a time such an occupation
will wither a man up, how soon he becomes almost nothing but
bones. Everyone knows and perceives this fact: so how is it nonethe­
less possible for young men not to start back at the sight of such
skeletons, but on the contrary again and again blindly to give them­
selves over to the sciences without restraint or selectivity? It can hardly
originate in any supposed 'desire for truth': for how could there exist
any desire at all for cold, pure, inconsequential knowledge! What it
really is that impels the servants of science is only too obvious to the
unprejudiced eye: and it is very advisable to examine and dissect the
men of learning themselves for once, since they for their part are
quite accustomed to laying bold hands on everything in the world,
even the most venerable things, and taking them to pieces. If I am to
speak out, I would say this: the man of learning consists of a con­
fused network of very various impulses and stimuli, he is an
altogether impure metal. First of all there is a strong and ever more
intense curiosity, the search for adventures in the domain of
1 69
knowledge, the constant stimulation exercised by the new and rare
in contrast to the old and tedious. Then there is a certain drive to
dialectical investigation, the huntsman's joy in following the sly fox's
path in the realm of thought, so that it is not really truth that is
sought but the seeking itself, and the main pleasure consists in the
cunning tracking, encircling, and correct killing. Now add to this the
impulse to contradiction, the personality wanting to be aware of
itself and to make itself felt in opposition to all others; the struggle
becomes a pleasure and the goal is personal victory, the struggle for
truth being only a pretext. Then, the man of learning is to a great
extent also motivated to the discovery of certain 'truths', motivated
that is by his subjection to certain ruling persons, castes, opinions,
churches, governments: he feels it is to his advantage to bring 'truth'
over to their side. The following qualities are also prominently dis­
played in the man of learning, less regularly than the previous ones
yet frequently enough. Firstly, probity and a sense for simplicity,
very worthy things provided they are something more than clumsi­
ness and lack of practice in dissimulatien, for which, after all, a cer­
tain amount of wit is needed. Indeed, wherever wit and dexterity are
strikingly in evidence, one should be a little on one's guard and
reserve one's judgment as to the uprightness of character of the person
possessing them. On the other hand, this probity is for the most part
oflittle worth and seldom fruitful even in the cause of science, since
it is wholly tied to convention and usually tell$ the truth only in simple
things or in adiaphoris; for in these cases laziness finds it easier to tell
the truth than to keep silent about it. And because everything new
makes it necessary to relearn, this probity will always, in case of need,
revere the old opinion and reproach the innovator with a lack of sensus
recti. * It certainly resisted the teachings of Copernicus because in this
case it had appearance and convention on its side. The hatred of
philosophy not at all uncommon among men oflearning is above all
hatred of the long chains of conclusions and the artificiality of the
proofs. At bottom, indeed, every generation of men of learning has
an unconscious canon of permitted sagacity; whatever goes beyond it
is called into question and all but employed to cast suspicion on the
probity of its propounder.
Secondly, sharpsightedness for things
close up, combined with great myopia for distant things and for
what is universal. His field of vision is usually very small and he has
to hold his eyes close to the object. If the man oflearning wants to go
*sensus recti: sense of what is right
1 70
Sclwpenhauer as educator
from one point he has just subjected to scrutiny to another, he has to
move his whole seeing-apparatus to this new point. H e  dissects a pic­
ture into little patches, like one who employs opera-glasses to view
the stage and then has a sight now of a head, now of a piece of clothing,
but never of anything whole. H e  never gets to see- these patches
joined together, his perception of how they are connected is only the
result of a conclusion, and thus he has no very strong conception of
anything universal. Because he is incapable of viewing a piece of
writing as a whole, for example, he judges it by a few passages or sen­
tences or errors; he would be tempted to assert that an oil-painting is
a disorderly heap of blots. - Thirdly, the sobriety and conven­
tionality of his nature in its likes and dislikes. This quality leads him
to take an especial pleasure in history, insofar as he can trace the
motives of men of the past in accordance with the motives he himself
knows of. A mole-tunnel is the right place for a mole. He is secure
against any artificial or extravagant hypotheses; if he sticks at it, he
will dig out all the commonplace motives that inform the past,
because he feels himself to be of the same commonplace species. For
precisely that reason, of course, he is usually incapable of
understanding or appreciating what is rare, great and uncommon,
that is to say what is essential and vital, in the past. - Founhly,
poverty of feeling and aridity. It makes him capable even of vivi­
section. H e  has no inkling of the suffering which knowledge often
brings with it, and therefore has no fear of venturing into regions
where the hearts of others fail them. He is cold and may therefore
easily seem cruel. He is also considered daring, but he is no more
daring than the mule, which is immune from vertigo. - Fifthly, low
self-esteem, amounting to modesty. Though confined to a wretched
little corner, they feel no sense of being sacrificed or wasted, they
often seem to realize in the depths of them that they are not flying
but creeping creatures. There is even something touching about this
quality. - Sixth, loyalty towards their teachers and leaders. They sin­
cerely want to help them, and they are well aware that they can best
help them through discovery of truth. For their feeling towards them
is one of gratitude, for it is only through them that they have gained
entry to the worthy halls of science, which they would never have
been able to do on their own. He who nowadays knows how to open
up a new field within which even the weakest heads can labour with
some degree of success becomes famous in a very shon time: so
great is the crowd that at once presses in. Every one of these loyal and
grateful people is at the same time a misfortune for the master, to be
1 7 1
--:
sure, since they all imitate him and his defects then seem dispro­
portionately great and exaggerated because they appear in such tiny
individuals, while it is the opposite with his virtues, which are pro­
portionately diminished when these same individuals display them.
- Seventh, routine continuation along the path on to which the
scholar has been pushed, a conception of truth determined by
unthinking subjection to an acquired habit. Such natures are collec­
tors, explainers, compilers of indices and herbariums; they study
and prowl around a single domain simply because it never occurs to
them that other domains exist. Their industriousness possesses
something of the tremendous stupidity of the force of gravity: which
is why they often achieve a great deal. - Eighth, flight from boredom.
While the genuine thinker longs for nothing more than he longs for
leisure, the ordinary scholar flees from it because he does not know
what to do with it. His consolation lies in books: that is to say, he listens
to what someone else thinks, and in this way he lets himself be enter­
tained throughout the long day. He chooses especially books which
in some way or other excite his persojal sympathies, which permit
him, through the arousal oflike or dislike, to feel some emotion: that
is to say, books in which he himself, or his class, his political or
aesthetic or even merely grammatical dogmas, are the subject of dis­
cussion; and if there is a field of study in which he specializes he
never lacks means of entertainment or fly-swatters against boredom.
Ninth, the motive of breadwinning, that is to say at bottom the
celebrated 'borborygm of an empty stomach'. Truth is served when
it is in a position directly to procure salaries and advancement, or at
least to win the favour of those who have bread and honours to dis­
tribute. But it is only this truth which is served: which is why a frontier
can be drawn between the profitable truths served by many and the
unprofitable truths: only a very few
those who do not act on the
principle ingenii largitor venter*
are devotees of the latter. - Tenth,
recognition by fellow scholars, fear of lacking their recognition; a
rarer and higher motive than the previous one, yet still very common.
All the members of the guild keep a very jealous watch on one
another, so that the truth upon which so much - bread, office, honours
- depends shall be baptized with the name ofits real discoverer. One
gives punctual recognition to the discoverer of a truth, so that one
can demand it in return if one should happen to discover a truth
oneself. Untruth, error, is resoundingly exploded, so that the number
"ingenii largitor venter: "the stomach is the squanderer of talent", from the pro­
logue to the Satires of Persius.
1 72
Schopenhauer as educator
of fellow candidates shall not grow too big; yet now and then the
actual truth is exploded too, so as to make room, at least for a time,
for obstinate and impudent errors; since here as elsewhere there is
no. lack of 'moral idiocies', otherwise called roguish pranks.
Eleventh, the scholar from vanity, a rarer variety. He wants if poss­
ible to have a domain all to himself and to that end selects strange
and curious studies, especially if they necessitate an unusually high
expenditure, travelling, excavations, numerous connections in
various countries. He is usually content to be gazed at in astonish­
ment as something strange and curious himself and has no thought
of earning his bread by means of his scholarly studies. - Twelfth, the
scholar for fun. The amusement consists in looking for tangles in the
sciences and unravelling them, while at the same time taking care
not to lose the feeling of playing through trying too hard. This
scholar, it goes without saying, never penetrates into the depths of a
problem, yet he will often notice things that the professional, with
his laborious poring over it, never does. - If, finally, I designate as
the thirteenth motive for scholarship the impulse to justice, one
could object that this noble impulse, which is indeed likely to be
regarded as virtually a metaphysical one, is altogether too hard to
distinguish from the other impulses and fundamentally vague and
ungraspable to the human eye; which is why I append this last number
with the pious hope that this impulse is more common and influen­
tial among scholars than it appears to be. For a spark from the fire of
justice fallen into a scholar's soul suffices to enkindle and purify his
life and strivings, so that he no longer knows any rest and is for ever
expelled from the lukewarm or frosty mood in which scholars
usually accomplish their daily work.
If one now imagines all these elements, or some of them,
vigorously mingled and shaken together, one has the coming-into­
being of the servant of truth. It is very strange how here, for the
benefit of an affair basically extra- and suprahuman, pure, inconse­
quential and thus impulseless knowledge, a host of little, very
human impulses should be poured together to produce a chemical
compound, and how the product, the man of learning, should
appear so transfigured in the light of that supraterrestrial, exalted
and altogether pure affair that one quite forgets the mixing and
mingling that was needed for his production. Yet there are times
when one is obliged to think of and remember precisely this: those
times when the scholar's significance for culture is in question. For
he who knows how to must observe that the scholar is by nature
1 73
unfruitful- a consequence of how he comes into exi'stence! - and that
he harbours · a certain natural hatred for the fruitful man; which is
why geniuses and scholars have at all times been at odds with one
another. For the latter want to kill, dissect and understand nature,
while the former want to augment nature with new living nature; and
so there exists a conflict of activities and intentions. Wholly fortunate
ages did not need the scholar and did not know him, wholly morbid
and listless ages have valued him as the highest and most venerable
of men and accorded him the highest rank.
How it stands with our own age in regard to health and sickness ­
who is sufficient of a physician to know that! Certainly the scholar is
in very many ways still too highly valued, which has a harmful effect
especially in all that concerns the evolving genius. The scholar has
no heart for the latter's distress; he speaks past him in a sharp, cold
voice, and all too soon he shrugs his shoulders as though over some­
thing queer and strange for which he has neither time nor incli­
nation. Knowledge of the goal of culture cannot be found in him
either. -
t
But what have we gained at all from these reflections? The
knowledge that where today culture seems to be most vigorously
pursued nothing is known of this goal. However loudly the state may
proclaim its service to culture, it furthers culture in order to further
itself and cannot conceive of a goal higher than its own welfare and
continued existence. What the money-makers really want when they
ceaselessly demand instruction and education is in the last resort
precisely money. When those who require form ascribe to themselves
the actual labour on behalf of culture and opine, for instance, that all
art belongs to them and must stand in the service of their require­
ments, what is quite clear is that by affirming culture they are merely
affirming themselves: that they too are therefore still involved in a
misunderstanding. Enough has been said of the scholarly man of
learning. And so we see that, however zealous all four powers .
together may be in promoting their own interests with the aid of cul..l
ture, they are dull and without inspiration when these interests are
not involved. And that is why the conditions for the production of
the genius have not improved in modern times, and why antipathy for
original men has increased to such an extent that Socrates could not
have lived among us and would in any event not have attained
seventy.
N ow I recall the theme I developed in the third section: that our
whole modern world has so little the appearance of permanence and
1 74
Schopenhauer as educator
solidity that one cannot prophesy an eternity even for its conception
of culture. One has even to consider it probable that the next thou­
sand years will hit on a couple of new ideas which might make the
hair of our contemporaries stand on end. The belief in a metaphysical
significance of culture would in the end not be as alarming as all that:
but perhaps some of the inferences one might draw from it in re­
spect of education and schooling might be.
It demands, to be sure, a quite exceptional reflective capacity to be
able to see beyond the educational institutions of the present to
those altogether strange and different institutions which may
perhaps be required only two or three generations hence. For while
the efforts of our present-day higher educators serve to produce
either the scholar or the civil servant or the money-maker or the
cultural philistine or, finally and more usually, a compound of them
all, those institutions still to be invented would have a more difficult
task - though not one more difficult as such, since it would be in any
event a more natural and to that extent also easier task; and can any­
thing be more difficult than, for example, to train a young man to be
a scholar, a thing contrary to nature by the methods at present
employed? The difficulty, however, lies for mankind in relearning
and envisaging a new goal; and it will cost an unspeakable amount of
effort to exchange the fundamental idea behind our present system
of education, which has its roots in the Middle Ages and the ideal of
which is actually the production of the medieval scholar, for a new
fundamental idea. It is already time we took a clear view of these
antitheses, for some generation has to commence the struggle if
another is to win it. The individual who has grasped this new fun­
damental idea of culture already finds himself at the crossroads; ifhe
takes one path he will be welcome to his own age, it will not fail to
offer him laurels and rewards, powerful parties will bear him along,
behind him there will be as many likeminded men as there will be
before him, and when the man in the front line gives the word of
command it will re-echo through all the ranks. Here the first duty is
'to fight in rank and file', the second to treat as enemies all who
refuse to fall in. The other path will offer him companions more
seldom, it will be more difficult, more tortuous, steeper; those who
have taken the first path will mock at him because his path is more
wearisome and more often dangerous, and will try to entice him
over to themselves. If the two paths happen to cross he will be mis­
handled, thrown aside or isolated by being cautiously walked
around. Now, what does a cultural institution mean to these dis-
1 7 5
similar wanderers on differing paths? The tremendous crowd that
presses towards its goal along the first path understands by it the
rules and arrangements by means of which it itself is brought to
order and marches forward and through which all the solitary and
recalcitrant, all who are looking for higher and more remote goals,
are excommunicated. For the smaller band on the other path an
institution would have a quite different purpose to fulfil; it wants the
protection of a firm organization so as to prevent itself from being
washed away and dispersed by that tremendous crowd, and so that
the individuals that comprise it shall not die from premature
exhaustion or even become alienated from their great task. These
individuals have to complete their work - that is the sense of their
staying together; and all who participate in the institution have,
through continual purification and mutual support, to help to pre­
pare within themselves and around them for the birth of the genius
and the ripening of his work. Not a few, including some from the
ranks of the second- and third-rate talents, are destined for the task
of rendering this assistance and only tn subjection to such a destiny
do they come to feel they have a duty and that their lives possess
significance and a goal. Nowadays, however, it is precisely these
talents who are diverted from their path and estranged from their
instincts by the seductive voices of that modish 'culture'; the temp­
tation is directed at their self-seeking impulses, at their weaknesses
ana vanities; it is to them precisely that the Zeitgeist whispers
insinuatingly: 'Follow me and do not go there! For there you are only
servants, assistants, instruments, outshone by higher natures, never
happy in being what you really are, pulled along in bonds, laid in
chains, as slaves, indeed as automata; here with me you shall, as mas­
ters, enjoy your free personality, your talents may glitter by their
own light, you yourselves shall stand in the foremost rank, a tremen­
dous following will throng around you, and the public acclamation
will surely please you better than a noble assent bestowed from the
cold ethereal heights of genius.' Even the best can succumb to such
enticements: and what is decisive here is hardly the rarity and
strength ofthe talent but rather the influence of a certain heroic basic
disposition and the degree of profound kinship and involvement
with the genius. For there do exist men who feel it as their own distress
when they see the genius involved in toilsome struggle, or in danger
of destroying himself, or when the shortsighted greed of the state,
the superficiality of the money-makers, the arid self-satisfaction of
the scholars treat his work with indifference: and so I also hope there
1 76
Schopenhauer as educator
are some who understand what I am trying to say with this exhi­
bitiori of Schopenhauer's destiny and to what end, according to my
notion, Schopenhauer as educator is actually to educate. -
But leaving aside all thoughts of the distant future and a possible
revolution in education: what would one have to desire and, if
necessary, procure for an evolving philosopher at present to enable
him to enjoy any leisure at all and, in the most favourable case,
achieve the kind of existence demonstrated by Schopenhauer - not
an easy one, to be sure, but certainly possible? What would have
also to be devised to make it more probable that he would produce
some effect on his contemporaries? And what obstacles would have
to be removed so that above all his example should produce its full
effect, so that the philosopher should again educate philosophers?
Here our reflections turn to practicalities and hard realities.
Nature wants always to be of universal utility, but it does not know
how to find the best and most suitable means and instruments for
this end: that is what it suffers from most, that is why nature is
melancholy. That nature has wanted to make existence explicable
and significant to man through the production of the philosopher
and the artist is, given nature's own desire for redemption, certain;
yet how uncertain, how dull and feeble is the effect it generally
achieves with the philosophers and artists! How rarely does it
achieve any effect at all! In the case of the philosopher especially it
experiences great difficulty in employing him in a universally useful
way; the means it employs seem to be only probing experiments and
ideas it has chanced upon, so that countless times it fails to achieve
its objective and most philosophers fail to become universally use­
ful. Nature seems to be bent on squandering; but it is squandering,
not through a wanton luxuriousness, but through inexperience; it
can be assumed that if nature were human it would never cease to be
annoyed at itself and its ineptitude. Nature propels the philosopher
into mankind like an arrow; it takes no aim but hopes the arrow will
stick somewhere. But countless times it misses and is depressed at
the fact. Nature is just as extravagant in the domain of culture as it is
in that of planting and sowing. It achieves its aims in a broad and
ponderous manner: and in doing so it sacrifices much too much
energy. The artist is related to the lovers of his art as a heavy cannon
is to a flock of sparrows. It is an act of simplicity to start an avalanche
1 7 7
so as to sweep away a little snow, to strike a man dead so as to kill a fly
on his nose. The artist and the philosopher are evidence against the
purposiveness of nature as regards the means it employs, though
they are also first-rate evidence as to the wisdom of its purpose. They
strike home at only a few, while they ought to strike home at
everybody
and even these few are not struck with the force with
which philosopher and artist launch their shot. It is sad to have to
arrive at an assessment of art as cause so different from our assess­
ment of art as effect: how tremendous it is as cause, how paralysed
and hollow as effect! The artist creates his work according to the will
of nature for the good of other men: that is indisputable; nonetheless
he knows that none of these other men will ever love and understand
his work as he loves and understands it. Thus this greater degree of
love and understanding is, given the ineptitude of nature, required
for the production of a smaller degree; the greater and nobler is
employed as a means of producing the lesser and ignoble. Nature is
a bad economist: its expenditure is much larger than the income it
procures; all its wealth notwithstandiljg, it is bound sooner or later
to ruin itself. It would have ordered its affairs more rationally if its
house-rule were: small expenses and hundredfold profit; if, for
example, there were only a few artists, and these of weaker powers,
but on the other hand numerous recipients of art of a stronger and
more mighty species than the species of the artist: so that the effect of
the work of art in relation to its cause would be a hundredfold
magnification. Or ought one not at least to expect that cause and
effect would be of equal force?
but how little nature comes up to
this expectation! It often seems as though an artist and especially a
philosopher only chances to exist in his age, as a hermit or a wanderer
who has lost his way and been left behind. Just think of the true
greatness of Schopenhauer - and then of how absurdly small his
effect has been! No honourable man of our age can fail to feel
ashamed when he sees how Schopenhauer seems to belong to it only
by accident and what forces and impotencies are to blame for the
fact that his influence has been so minimal. First, for a long time, and
to the everlasting shame of our era of literature, he had against him
his lack of readers; then, when he acquired them, he had against him
the inadequacy of his earliest advocates: even more, it seems to me,
he had against him the obtuseness on the part of all modern men
with regard to books, which they are altogether unwilling to take
seriously; a new danger has gradually appeared in addition, deriving
from the manifold attempts that have been made to adapt
1 78
Sdwpenhauer as educator
Schopenhauer to this feeble age or even to employ him as an exotic
and stimulating spice, as it were a kind of metaphysical pepper. So it
is that, though he has gradually become famous and his name is, I
think, already known to more people than Hegel's, he is nonetheless
still a hermit and has still produced no effect! The -honour of this
achievement belongs least of all to his actual literary opponents and
denigrators, firstly because there are few who can endure to read
them, secondly because they lead those who can endure to do so
directly to Schopenhauer; for who would let a donkey-driver dis­
suade him from mounting a handsome horse, no matter how
extravagantly he extolled his donkey at the horse's expense?
He who has recognized the unreason in the nature of this age,
then, will have to thinkof means of rendering it a little assistance; his
task, however, will be to make the free spirits and those who suffer
profoundly from our age acquainted with Schopenhauer, assemble
them together and through them to engender a current capable of
overcoming the ineptitude with which nature employs the phil­
osopher. Such men will come to realize that the forces which lunt
the effect of a great philosophy are the same as those which stand in
the way of the production of a philosopher; which is why they are
entitled to regard it as their goal to prepare the way for the re­
production of Schopenhauer, that is to say of the philosophical
genius. That which opposed the effect and propagation of his teaching
from the first, however, that which in the end wants to vitiate any
rebirth of the philosopher with every means in its power, is, to speak
bluntly, the perversity of contemporary human nature: which is why
all great human beings have to squander an incredible amount of
energy in the course of their development merely to fight their way
through this perversity in themselves. The world they now enter is
shrouded in humbug; it does not have to be religious dogma, it can
also be such bogus concepts as 'progress', 'universal education',
'national', 'modern state', 'cultural struggle'; one can say, indeed,
that all generalizing words now wear artificial and unnatural finery,
so that a more enlightened posterity will reproach our age with being
to an unheard-of degree distorted and degenerate, however much
we may boast of our 'health'. The beauty of antique vessels, says
Schopenhauer, arises from the fact that they express in so naive a
way what they are intended to be and to perform; and the same
applies to all the other articles of the ancients: on beholding them
one feels that, if nature produced vases, amphorae, lamps, tables,
chairs, helmets, shields, armour and so forth, this is how they would
1 79
look. Conversely: whoever observes general modern Ćttitudes to art,
state, religion, education - not to speak, for good reasons, of our
'vessels'
discovers in mankind a certain barbaric capriciousness
and intemperance of expression, and the genius is hampered most
of all in his development by the prevalence in his time of such
strange concepts and fanciful requirements: these are the leaden
pressures which, invisible and inexplicable, so often weigh down his
hand when he sets it to the plough - so that, because even his su­
preme works have had to force their way up violently, they too to
some extent bear the traces of this violence.
IfI now seek out the conditions with the assistance of which a born
philosopher can in the most favourable case at least avoid being
crushed by the perversity of our times just described, I notice some­
thing singular: they are in part precisely the conditions under which
Schopenhauer himself on the whole grew up. There is no lack of
contrary conditions, to be sure: the perversity of the age came fear­
fully close to him, for example, in the person of his vain and
culturally pretentious mother. But dre proud, free, republican
character of his father as it were saved him from his mother and be­
stowed upon him the first thing a philosopher needs: inflexible and
rugged manliness. This father of his was neither an official nor a
scholar: he travelled a great deal with the boy in foreign countries -
all of these things so many encouragements for one who was to study
not books but men, and revere not governments but truth. He
learned in good time to be indifferent to national narrownesses or
extremely critical of them; he lived in England, France and Italy as
he did in his own country and felt not a little affinity with the spirit of
Spain. On the whole he did not regard it as an honour to have been
born among Germans; and I do not know that he would have felt dif­
ferently under the new political dispensation. As is well known, he
considered the purpose of the state to be to provide protection
against forces from without, protection against forces from within,
and protection against the protectors, and that if any purpose was
invented for it other than the provision of protection its true purpose
could easily be imperilled -: that is why, to the horror of all so-called
liberals, he left his property to the survivors among the Prussian
troops whose comrades had fallen fighting for the preservation of
order in 1 848. It will probably be increasingly the sign of spiritual
superiority from now on if a man takes the state and his duties
1 80
Schopenhauer as educator
towards it lightly; for he who has the furor philosophicus * within him
will already no longer have time for the furor politicust and will wisely
refrain from reading the newspapers every day, let alone working for
a political party: though he will not hesitate for a moment to be at his
place when his fatherland experiences a real emergency. Every state
in which anyone other than the statesman has to concern himself
with politics is ill organized and deserves to perish by all these
politicians.
Another great advantage Schopenhauer enjoyed was the fact that
he was not brought up destined from the first to be a scholar, but
actually worked for a time, if with reluctance, in a merchant's office
and in any event breathed throughout his entire youth the freer air of
a great mercantile house. A scholar can never become a philosopher;
for even Kant was unable to do so but, the inborn pressure of his
genius notwithstanding, remained to the end as it were in a chrysalis
stage. He who thinks that in saying this I am doing Kant an injustice
does not know what a philosopher is, namely not merely a great thinker
but also a real human being; and when did a schoƜar ever become a
real human being? He who lets concepts, opinions, past events,
books, step between himself and things - he, that is to say, who is in
the broadest sense born for history - will never have an immediate
perception of things and will never be an immediately perceived
thing himself; but both these conditions belong together in the
philosopher, because most of the instruction he receives he has to
acquire out of himself and because he serves himself as a reflection
and brief abstract of the whole world. If a man perceives himself by
means of the opinions of others, it is no wonder ifhe sees in himself
nothing but the opinions of others! And that is how scholars are, live
and see. Schopenhauer, on the other hand, had the indescribable
good fortune to be able to see genius from close up not only in him­
self, but also outside himself in Goethe: through this twofold reflec­
tion he was aware of and wise to all scholarly goals and cultures from
the ground up. By virtue of this experience he knew what the strong
and free human being for which every artistic culture longs must be
like; given this insight, how could he have had much desire left to
involve himself with so-called 'art' in the scholarly or hypocritical
*furor philosophicus: philosophical passion
t furor politicus: political passion
1 8 1
manner of modern man? For he had seen something higher: a
dreadful scene in a supraterrestrial court in which all life, even the
highest and most perfect, had been weighed and found wanting: he
had seen the saint as judge of existence. We cannot determine at all
closely how early in his life Schopenhauer must have perceived this
picture of life in all its details and as he sought to reproduce it in all
his subsequent writings; we can · demonstrate that he saw this
tremendous vision as a young man, and can well believe he had
already seen it as a child. Everything he subsequently appropriated
to himself from life and books, from the whole wealth of the sciences,
was to him hardly more than colouring and means of expression; he
employed even the Kantian philosophy above all as an extra­
ordinary rhetorical instrument through which he believed he could
speak of that picture more clearly: just as he occasionally made use
of Buddhist and Christian mythology to the same end. For him there
was only one task and a hundred-thousand means of encompassing
it: one meaning and countless hieroglyphics with which to
express it.
I
Among the most glorious conditions of his existence was the fact
that he was able, in accordance with his motto vitam impendere vero, *
really to live for such a task and that he was oppressed by none of the
petty necessities of life: - how generously he attributed this circum­
stance to the efforts of his father is well known; whereas in Germany
the theoretical man usually pursues his scholarly destiny at the
expense of the purity of his character, as a 'thinking ragamuffin',
greedy for posts and honours, cautious and pliable, ingratiating
towards those with influence and position. Of all the offence
Schopenhauer has given to numerous scholars, nothing has offended
them more than the unfortunate fact that he does not resemble
them.
These, then, are some of the conditions under which the philosophical
genius can at any rate come into existence in our time despite the
forces working against it: free manliness of character, early
knowledge of mankind, no scholarly education, no narrow patri­
otism, no necessity for bread-winning, no ties with the state - in
short, freedom and again freedom: that wonderful and perilous ele­
ment in which the Greek philosophers were able to grow up.
"vitam impendere vero: devote one's life to the truth
1 82
Sclwpenhauer as educator
Whoever wants to reproach him, as Niebuhr reproached Plato, with
being a bad citizen, let him do so and be a good citizen himself: thus
he will be in the right and so will Plato. Another will see this great
freedom as a piece of presumption: he too is ,right, for he himself
would do nothing with it and it would be very presumptuous in him
to claim it for himself. That freedom is in fact a heavy debt which can
be discharged only by means of great deeds. In truth, every ordinary
son of earth has the right to regard with resentment a man favoured
in this way: only may some god guard him from being thus favoured
himself, that is from becoming so fearfully indebted. For he would at
once perish of his freedom and solitude, and become a fool, and a
malicious fool at that, out of boredom.
From what we have discussed perhaps some father or other may
be able to learn something and apply it in some way to the private
education of his son; though it is truly not to be expected that fathers
will want only philosophers for sons. It is probable that fathers in
every age have put up the most determined resistance to their sons'
being philosophers, as though it were extremely perverse; as is well
known, Socrates fell victim to the wrath of the fathers over his 'se­
duction of youth', and Plato for that reason considered it necessary
to institute a whole new state if the existence of the philosopher was
not to be imperilled by the unreason of the fathers. It almost looks
now as though Plato really did achieve something. For the modern
state regards the promotion of philosophy as among its tasks and
seeks at all times to bless a number of men with that 'freedom' which
we understand as the most essential condition for the genesis of the
philosopher. But historically speaking Plato has been singularly
unfortunate: as soon as a structure has appeared which has essen­
tially corresponded to his proposals, it has always turned out on
close examination to be a changeling, an ugly elf-child; such as the
medieval priestly state was by comparison with the rule of the 'sons
of god' he had dreamed of. The last thing the modern state wants to
do, of course, is to install philosophers as rulers'
God be praised!
every Christian will add -: but even promotion of philosophy as the
state understands it will one day have to be inspected to see whether
the state understands it Platonically, which is to say as seriously and
honestly as though its highest objective were to produce new Platos.
If the philosopher as a rule appears in his age by chance - does the
state now really set itself the task of consciously translating this for­
tuitousness into necessity and here too rendering assistance to
nature?
1 83
Experience unfortunately teaches us better - or rather, worse: it
tells us that nothing stands so much in the way of the production and
propagation of the great philosopher by nature as does the bad
philosopher who works for the state. A painful fact, is it not?
recognizably the same as that to which Schopenhauer first directed
attention in his celebrated treatise on university philosophy. I shall
return to it later: for one has to compel men to take it seriously, that
is to say to let it inspire them to action, and I consider every word
behind which there does not stand such a challenge to action to have
been written in vain; and it is in any event a good thing again to
demonstrate the truth of Schopenhauer's always valid propositions,
and to do so by direct reference to our closest contemporaries, since
a well-disposed man might think that since he launched his accu­
sations everything has taken a turn for the better in Germany. Even
on this point, minor though it is, his work is not yet done.
Considered more closely, that 'freedom' with which, as I have
said, the state now blesses some men for the good of philosophy is
no freedom at all but an office of. profit. The promotion of
philosophy nowadays consists, it seems, only in the state's enabling a
number of men to live from their philosophy by making of it a means
of livelihood: whereas the sages of ancient Greece were not paid by
the state hut at most were, like Zeno, honoured with a gold crown
and a monument in the Ceramicus. Whether truth is served when
one is shown a way of living off it I cannot say in general, because
here it all depends on the quality of the individual who is shown it. I
could well envisage a degree of pride and self-esteem which would
lead a man to say to his fellow-men: look after me, for I have some­
thing better to do, namely to look after you. I n the case of Plato or
Schopenhauer, such grandeur of disposition and expression would
not alienate one; which is why precisely they could even be uni­
versity philosophers, as Plato was for a time a court philosopher,
without demeaning the dignity of philosophy. But even Kant was, as
we scholars are accustomed to be, cautious, subservient and, in his
attitude towards the state, without greatness: so that, if university
philosophy should ever be called to account, he at any rate could not
justify it. And if there are natures capable of justifying it - such
natures as those of Schopenhauer and Plato - I fear they will never
have occasion for doing so, since no state would ever dare to favour
such men and install them in university posts. Why is that so?
Because every state fears them and will favour only philosophers it
does not fear. For it does happen that the state is afraid of philosophy
1 84
Schopenhauer as educator
as such, and when this is the case it will try all the more to draw to it
philosophers who will give it the appearance of having philosophy
on its side - because it has on its side those men who bear the name
of philosopher and yet are patently nothing to inspire fear. If,
however, a man should arise who really gave the impression of
intending to apply the seal pel of truth to all things, including the
body of the state, then the state would, since it affirms its own exist­
ence before all else, be justified in expelling such a man and treating
him as an enemy: just as it expels and treats as an enemy a religion
which sets itself above the state and desires to be its judge. So if any­
one is to tolerate being a philosopher in the employ of the state, he
wilf also have to tolerate being regarded as having abandoned any
attempt to pursue truth into all its hideouts. At the very least he is
obliged, so long as he is the recipient of favours and offices, to
recognize something as being higher than truth, namely the state.
And not merely the state but at the same time everything the state
considers necessary for its wellbeing: a certain form of religion, for
example, or of social order, or of army regulations - a noli me tangere *
is inscribed upon everything of this sort.
Can a university
philosopher ever have realized to the full the whole gamut of duties
and limitations imposed upon him? I do not know; if he has done so
and has nonetheless remained an official of the state he has been a
bad friend of truth; if he has never done so - well, I would say he
would still be no friend of truth.
This is the most general objection: to people as they are now,
however, it is of course the weakest objection and the one to which
they are most indifferent. Most will be content to shrug their
shoulders and say: 'as though anything great and pure has ever been
able to maintain itself on this earth without making concessions to
human baseness! Would you prefer it if the state persecuted the
philosopher rather than paid him and took him into service?'
Without immediately replying to this-question, I shall only observe
that these concessions to the state on the part of philosophy go very
far at the present time. Firstly: it is the state which selects its
philosophical servants, and which selects just the number it needs to
supply its institutions; it therefore takes on the appearance of being
able to distinguish between good philosophers and bad ones and,
even worse, it presupposes that there must always be a sufficiency of
good philosophers to fill all its academic chairs. It is now the authority,
not only with regard to the quality of philosophers, but also in
"noli me tangere: do not touch me
1 85
I
I
regard to how many good philosophers are needed. Secondly: it
compels those it has chosen to reside in a certain place, to live among
certain people, to undertake a certain activity; they are obliged to
instruct every academic youth who desires instruction, and to do so
daily at certain fixed hours. Question: can a philosopher really
undertake with a good conscience to have something to teach every
day? And to teach it to anyone who cares to listen? Will he not be
obliged to give the impression of knowing more than he does know?
Will he not be obliged to speak before an audience of strangers of
things which he can safely speak of only among his nearest friends?
And speaking generally: is he not robbing himself of his freedom to
follow his genius whenever and wherever it calls him? - through
being obligated to think in public about predetermined subjects at
predetermined hours? And to do so before youths! Is such thinking
not as it were emasculated from the first! Supposing one day he said
to himself: I can't think of anything today, at least not of anything
worthwhile - he would still have to present himself and pretend
to think!
b
But, you will object, he is not supposed to be a thinker at all, but at
most a learned presenter of what others have thought: and as to that,
he will always have something to say his pupils do not already know.
- But precisely this - to undertake to appear first and foremost as
scholarliness - is the third perilous concession which philosophy
makes to the state. Above all when it appears as knowledge of the his­
tory of philosophy: for to the genius, who gazes upon things as a
poet does, with pure and loving eyes, and cannot immerse himself
too deeply in them, grubbing around in countless strange and per­
verse opinions is the most repugnant and inappropriate occupation
imaginable. The learned history of the past has never been the busi­
ness of a true philosopher, neither in India nor in Greece; and if a
professor of philosophy involves himself in such work he must at
best be content to have it said of him: he is a fine classical scholar,
antiquary, linguist, historian - but never: he is a philosopher. And
that, as remarked, is only at best: for most of the learned work done
by university philosophers seems to a classicist to be done badly,
without scientific rigour and mostly with a detestable tediousness.
Who, for example, can clear the history of the Greek philosophers of
the soporific miasma spread over it by the learned, though not par­
ticularly scientific and unfortunately all too tedious, labours of Ritter,
Brandis and Zeller? I for one prefer reading Laertius Diogenes to
Zeller, because the former at least breathes the spirit of the
1 86
Sclwpenhauer as educator
philosophers of antiquity, while the latter breathes neither that nor
any other spirit. And finally, what in the world have our young men
to do with the history of philosophy? Is the confusion of opinions
supposed to discourage them from having opinions of their own?
Are they supposed to learn how to join in the rejoicing at.how won­
derfully far we ourselves have come? Are they supposed even to
learn to hate philosophy or to despise it? One might almost think so
when one knows how students have to torment themselves for the
sake of their philosophical examinations so as to cram into their
poor brain the maddest and most caustic notions of the human spirit
together with the greatest and hardest to grasp. The only critique of a
philosophy that is possible and that proves something, namely trying
t'o see whether one can live in accordance with it, has never been
taught at universities: all that has ever been taught is a critique of
words by means of other words. And now imagine a youthful head,
not very experienced in living, in which fifty systems in the form of
words and fifty critiques of them are preserved side-by-side and
intermingled - what a desert, what a return to barbarism, what a
mockery of an education in philosophy! But of course it is admit­
tedly no such thing; it is a training in passing philosophical examin­
ations, the usual outcome of which is well known to be that the youth
to be tested - tested all too severely, alas! - admits to himself with a
sigh of relief: 'Thank God I am no philosopher, but a Christian and a
citizen of my country!'
What if this sigh of relief were the state's actual objective and
'education in philosophy' only a means of deterring from philosophy?
Let one ask oneself this question. - If it really is so, however, there is
only one thing to be feared: that youth may one day finally come to
realize to what end philosophy is here being misused. The supreme
objective, the production of the philosophical genius, nothing but a
pretext? The goal perhaps the prevention of his production? The
meaning of it all reversed into its opposite? In that case - woe to the
whole complex of state and professorial policy! -
And is something of the sort not supposed to have transpired
already? I do not know; but I do know that university philosophy is
now the object of universal disrespect and scepticism. This is in part
due to the fact that a feebler race now holds sway over the lecture­
room; and if Schopenhauer had to write his treatise on university
philosophy now, he would no longer have need of the club but
would conquer with a reed. They are the heirs and progeny of those
pseudo-thinkers whose much-turned heads he battered: their
1 87
appearance is sufficiently infantile and dwarfish for us t'o be reminded
of the Indian saying: 'Men are born, in accordance with their deeds,
stupid, dumb, deaf, misshapen.' Their fathers deserved such a
progeny by virtue of their 'deeds', as the saying has it. That is why it is
quite indisputable that academic youth will very soon be able to
manage without the philosophy taught: at their universities, and that
unacademic men are already able to manage without it. One has
only to recall one's own student days; in my case, for example,
academic philosophers were men towards whom I was perfectly
indifferent: I counted them as people who raked together something
for themselves out of the results of the other sciences and employed
their leisure time in reading newspapers and going to concerts, and
for the rest were treated by their own academic comrades with a
politely masked contempt. They were credited with knowing little
and with never being at a loss for some obscure expression with
which to conceal this lack of knowledge. They thus preferred to
dwell in gloomy places where the clear-eyed cannot endure to be for
long. One of them urged it against thj natural sciences: none of
them can completely explain to me the simplest process of becoming,
so what have any of them to do with me? Another said of history: to
him who has ideas it has nothing new to say - in short, they always
discovered reasons why it was more philosophical to know nothing
than to learn something. If they did engage in learning, their secret
motive in doing so was to elude science and to found a dark domain
in one or other of its lacunae. Thus they went on ahead of the sciences
only in the sense that the deer is ahead of the huntsmen who are after
it. Lately they have been content to assert that they are really no more
than the frontier guards and spies of the sciences; to which end they
are especially served by the teachings of Kant, out of which they are
intent upon fashioning an idle scepticism that will soon be of no
interest to anybody. Only now and then does one of them still hoist
himself up to a little system of metaphysics, with the consequences
that usually follow, namely dizziness, headache and nosebleed.
After having so often enjoyed no success on this trip into the mist
and clouqs, after some rude, hard-headed disciple of the real sciences
has again and again seized them by the pigtail and pulled them back
down, their face habitually assumes an expression of primness and
of having been found out. They have lost their confidence, so that
none of them lives even a moment for the sake of his philosophy.
Formerly some of them believed themselves capable of inventing
new religions or of replacing old ones with their philosophical sys-
1 88
Schopenhauer as educator
terns; nowadays they have lost all this old arrogance and are as a rule
pious, timid and uncertain folk, never brave like Lucretius or wrath­
ful at human oppression. Neither can one any longer learn from
them how to think logically and, with a correct estimation of their
powers, they have ceased the formal disputations they used to prac­
tise. It is indisputable that the individual sciences are now pursued
more logically, cautiously, modestly, inventively, in short more
philosophically, than is the case with so-called philosophers: so that
everyone will agree with the impartial Englishman Bagehot when he
says of our contemporary system-builders: 'Who is not almost sure
beforehand that they will contain a strange mixture of truth and
error, and therefore that it will not be worthwhile to spend life in
reasoning over their consequences? The mass of a system attracts the
young and impresses the unwary; but cultivated people are very
dubious about it. They are ready to receive hints and suggestions
and the smallest real truth is ever welcome. But a large book of
deductive philosophy is much to be suspected. Unproved abstract
principles without number have been eagerly caught up by sanguine
men and then carefully spun out into books and theories which were
to explain the whole world. The world goes totally against these
abstractions, and it must do so since they require it to go in
antagonistic directions."Ʈ If formerly philosophers, especially in
Germany, used to be sunk in such profound reflection that they were
in constant danger of hitting their head on a beam, they are now sup­
plied with a whole regiment of flappers, such as Swift describes in the
Voyage to Laputa, to give them a gentle blow now and then on the
eyes or elsewhere. Sometimes these blows may be a little too heavy,
on which occasions the enraptured thinker can easily forget himself
and hit back - something that always results in his discomfiture.
Can't you see the beam, you sleepy-head! the flapper then says - and
often the philosopher really does see the beam and becomes trac­
table again. These flappers are history and the natural sciences; they
have gradually come so to overawe the German dream-
and
thought-business which was for long confused with philosophy that
these thought-mongers would be only too glad to abandon any
attempt at an independent existence; ifhowever they should happen
to impede the former or try to fasten leading-strings on to them, the
flappers at once start to flap as violently as they can - as though they
* Quoted from Bagehot's Physics and Politics. The order of the sentences in the
original passage is inverted in Nietzsche's quotation of it, but this appears not to affect
the meaning.
1 89
wanted to say: 'For a thought-monger like this to profane our history
or natural sciences would be the last straw! Away with him!' Then
they totter back into their own uncertainty and perplexity: they really
do want to get a little natural science into their possession, perhaps
like the Herbartians in the shape of empirical psychology, they really
do want a little history as well - then they can act, at least in public, as
though they were engaged in scientific undertakings, even though in
private they would like to consign all philosophy and science to
the devil.
But granted that this troop of bad philosophers is ludicrous - and
who will not grant it? - to what extent are they also harmful? The
answer, in brief, is: to the extent that they make philosophy itselfludicrous. As
long as this officially recognized guild of pseudo-thinkers continues
to exist, any effectiveness of a true philosophy will be brought to
naught or at least obstructed, and it will suffer this fate through no­
thing other than the curse of the ludicrous which the representatives
of that philosophy have called down upon themselves but which also
strikes at philosophy itself. That is why I say it is a demand of culture
that philosophy should be deprived of any kind of official or
academic recognition and that state and academy be relieved of the
task, which they cannot encompass, of distinguishing between real
and apparent philosophy. Let the philosophers grow untended,
deny them all prospect of place and position within the bourgeois
professions, cease to entice them with salaries, more, persecute
them, show them disfavour
you will behold miracles! The poor
seeming philosophers will flee apart and seek a roof wherever they
can find it; one will become a parson, another a schoolmaster, a
third will creep into the shelter of an editorial jo b on a newspaper, a
fourth will write instruction manuals for girls' high schools, the most
sensible of them will take up the plough and the vainest will go to
court. Suddenly it will all be empty, everyone will have flown the
nest: for it is easy to get rid of bad philosophers, one only has to cease
rewarding them. And that is in any event more advisable than for the
state publicly to patronize any philosophy, whichever it may be.
The state never has any use for truth as such, but only for truth
which is useful to it, more precisely for anything whatever useful to it
whether it be truth, half-truth or error. A union of state and
philosophy can therefore make sense only if philosophy can promise
to be unconditionally useful to the state, that is to say, to set useful­
ness to the state higher than truth. It would of course be splendid for
the state if it also had truth in its pay and service; but the state itself
1 90
Schopenhauer as educator
well knows that it is part of the essence of truth that it never accepts pay
or stands in anyone's service. Thus what the state has is only false
'truth', a person in a mask; and unfortunately this cannot do for it
what it so much desires genuine truth to do: validate and sanctify it.
It is true that if a medieval prince wanted to be crowned by the Pope
but the Pope refused to do it, he nominated an anti-Pope who then
perfonned for him this service. This might have worked then to
some extent; but for a modern state to nominate an anti-philosophy
to legitimatize it will not work: for it will still have philosophy against
it as before, and now more than before. I believe in all seriousness
that it is more useful to the state to have nothing at all to do with
philosophy, to desire nothing from it and for as long as possible to
regard it as something to which it is completely indifferent. If this
condition of indifference does not endure, if it becomes dangerous
and hostile to the state, then let the state persecute it. - Since the state
can have no interest in the university other than seeing it raise useful
and devoted citizens of the state, it should hesitate to place this
usefulness and devotion in jeopardy by demanding that these young
men should sit an examination in philosophy: it could well be, of
course, that the dull and incompetent would be frightened off
university study altogether by this spectre of a philosophy examin­
ation; but this gain could not compensate for the harm done to rash
and restless youth by this enforced drudgery; they get to know books
forbidden them, begin to criticize their teachers and finally even
become aware of the objective of university philosophy and its
examinations - not to speak of the misgivings which this cir­
cumstance can excite in young theologians and as a result of which
they are beginning to die out in Germany, as the ibex is in the TyroL
I understand well enough the objections the state could have
raised against this whole way of looking at things so long as the fair
green shoots of Hegelianism were sprouting up in every field: but
now that this harvest has come to nothing, all the expectations built
upon it have proved vain and all the barns remained empty - one
prefers no longer to raise objections but to tum away from
philosophy altogether. One now possesses power: formerly, in
Hegel's time, one wanted to possess it - that is a vast distinction.
Philosophy has become superfluous to the state because the state no
longer needs its sanction. If the state no longer maintains its pro­
fessors or, as I foresee in the near future, appears to maintain them
but in fact neglects them, it derives advantage from doing so - yet it
appears to me of more importance that the universities should see
1 9 1
I
. !
that it is to their benefit too. At least I would think that an institution
for the real sciences must see it is good for it no longer to have to
keep company with a semi-science. The universities enjoy so little
regard, moreover, they must on principle desire the exclusion of
disciplines which academics themselves hold in low esteem. For
non-academics have good reason for a certain general disrespect for
universities; they reproach them with being cowardly, since the
small ones fear the big ones and the big ones fear public opinion;
with failing to take the lead in questions of higher culture but limping
slowly and tardily in the rear, with ceasing to maintain the respected
sciences on their true course. Linguistic studies, for example, are
pursued more zealously than ever, but no one considers it necessary
to educate himself in correct writing and speaking. Indian antiquity
is opening its gates, yet the relationship of those who study it to the
imperishable works of the Indians, to their philosophies, hardly dif­
fers from that of an animal to a lyre: even though Schopenhauer con­
sidered its acquaintance with Indian philosophy the greatest
advantage our century possessed overjill others. Classical antiquity
has become a take-it-or-Ieave-it antiquity and has ceased to produce
a classic and exemplary effect; a fact demonstrated by its disciples,
who are truly not exemplary. Whither has the spirit of Friedrich
August Wolf departed, of which Franz Passow could say it appeared
a genuinely patriotic, genuinely human spirit which, if it needed to,
possessed the force to set a continent on fire and in ferment - where
has this spirit gone? On the other hand, the spirit of the journalist is
penetrating the universities more and more, and not seldom under
the name of philosophy; a smooth, highly coloured mode of
address, Faust and Nathan the Wise constantly invoked, the
language and views of our nauseating literary journals, lately even
chattering about our sacred German music and the demand for
chairs for the study of Goethe and Schiller - all signs that the spirit of
the university is beginning to confuse itself with the Zeitgeist. It thus
seems to me of the first importance that there should be created out­
side the universities a higher tribunal whose function would be to
supervise and judge these institutions in regard to the education
they are promoting; and as soon as philosophy departs from the
universities, and therewith purifies itself of all unworthy consider­
ations and prejudices, it must constitute precisely such a tribunal:
devoid of official authority, without salaries or honours, it will know
how to perform its duty free of the Zeitgeist and free from fear of it- in
short, as Schopenhauer lived, as the judge of the so-called culture
1 92
Schopenhauer as educator
around him. I n this way the philosopher, if instead of amalgamating
with it he supervises it from a dignified distance, is able to be of use
to the university.
Finally, however - of what concern to us is the existence of the
state, the promotion of universities, when what matters above all is
the existence of philosophy on earth! or - to leave absolutely no
doubt as to what I think - if it is so unspeakably more vital that a
philosopher should appear on earth than that a state or a university'
should continue to exist. ,The dignity of philosophy can increase in
the measure that servitude to public opinion and the danger to
freedom increases; it was at its greatest during the earthquake
attending the fall of the Roman republic and during the imperial
era, when its name and that of history became ingrata principibus
nomina. * Brutus demonstrates more for its dignity than does Plato;
he belonged to an age in which ethics ceased to be platitudinous. If
philosophy is little regarded at present, one ought only to ask why it
is that no great general or statesman at present has anything to do
with it - the answer is simply that at the time he sought it he encoun­
tered a feeble phantom bearing the name of philosophy, a scholarly
lecture-hall wisdom and lecture-hall cautiousness; in short, it is
because in his early years philosophy became to him something
ludicrous. What it ought to be to him, however, is something fear­
some, and men called to the search for power ought to know what a
source of the heroic wells within it. Let an American tell them what a
great thinker who arrives on this earth signifies as a new centre of
tremendous forces. 'Beware', says Emerson, 'when the great God
lets loose a thinker on this planet. Then all things are at risk. It is as
when a conflagration has broken out in a great city, and no man
knows what is safe, or where it will end. There is not a piece of science
but its flank may be turned tom.orrow; there is not any literary
reputation, not the so-called eternal names of fame, that may not be
revised and condemned; the things which are dear to men at this
hour are so on account of the ideas which have emerged on their
mental horizon, and which cause the present order of things, as a
tree bears its apples. A new degree of culture would instantly revolutionize
the entire system of human pursuits.'t Now, if such thinkers are
dangerous, it is of course clear why our academic thinkers are not
dangerous; for their thoughts grow as peacefully out of tradition as
*ingrata principibus nomina: names displeasing to princes
tQ.uoted from Emerson's essay entitled 'Circles'.
1 93
any tree ever bore its apples: they cause no alarm, they remove no­
thing from its hinges; and of all their art and aims there could be said
what Diogenes said when someone praised a philosopher in his
presence: 'How can he be considered great, since he has been a
philosopher for so long and has never yet disturbed anybody?' That,
indeed, ought to be the epitaph of university philosophy: 'it dis­
turbed nobody'. But this, of course, is praise of an old woman rather
than of the goddess of truth, and it is not to be wondered at if those
who know that goddess only as an old woman are themselves very
unmanly and thus, as might be expected, completely ignored by the
men of power.
But if this is how things stand in our time, then the dignity of
philosophy is trampled into the dust; it has even become something
ludicrous, it would seem, or a matter of complete indifference to
anyone: so that it is the duty of all its true friends to bear witness
against this confusion, and at the least to show that it is only its false
and unworthy servants who are ludicrous or a matter of indifference.
It would be better still if they demonstraƑd by their deeds that love
of truth is something fearsome and mighty.
Schopenhauer demonstrated both these things -
and will
demonstrate them more and more as day succeeds day.
1 94
Richard Wagner
in Bayreuth
I
For an event to possess greatness two things must come together:
greatness of spirit in those who accomplish it and greatness of spirit
in those who experience it. No event possesses greatness in itself,
though it involve the disappearance of whole constellations, the de­
struction of entire peoples, the foundation of vast states or the pros­
ecution of wars involving tremendous forces and tremendous losses:
the breath of history has blown away many things of that kind as
though they were flakes of snow. It can also happen that a man of
force accomplishes a deed which strikes a reef and sinks from sight
having produced no impression; a brief, sharp echo, and all is over.
H istory has virtually nothing to report about such as it were trunc­
ated and neutralized events. And so whenever we see an event
approaching we are overcome with the fear that those who will
experience it will be unworthy of it. Whenever one acts, in small
things as in great, one always has in view this correspondence be­
tween deed and receptivity; and he who gives must see to it that he
finds recipients adequate to the meaning of his gift. This is why even
the individual deed of a man great in himself lacks greatness if it is
brief and without resonance or effect; for at the moment he per­
formed it he must have been in error as to its necessity at precisely
that time: he failed to take correct aim and chance became master
over him - whereas to be great and to possess a clear grasp of
necessity have always belonged strictly together.
We can therefore happily leave any dubiety as to whether that
which is now taking place in Bayreuth is necessary and taking place
at the right time to those who doubt Wagner's grasp of necessity
itself. To us with greater faith it must seem that he believes in the
greatness of his deed just as he does in the greatness of those who are
to experience it. All to whom this belief is accorded should feel
proud of the fact, whether they be few or many - for that it is not
accorded to everyone, neither to the whole of our age nor even to the
German people as it stands at present, he told us himself in his
dedicatory address of 22 May 1 87 2; and though to contradict him in
this would be a consolation to him, none of us dares do it. 'When I
sought those who would sympathize with my plans,' he said then, 'I
had only you, the friends of my particular art, my mǶst personal
work and creation, to turn to: it was only from you that I could
expect assistance in presenting this work in pure and undisfigured
form to those who had demonstrated a serious interest in my art
even though it had hitherto been presented to them only in impure
and disfigured form.' >:0
In Bayreuth the spectator too is worth seeing, there is no doubt
about that. A wise observer who moved from one century to another
to compare noteworthy cultural movements would have much to
see there; he would feel as though he had suddenly entered warmer
water, like one swimming in a lake who approaches a current from a
hot spring: this water must be corning from other, deeper sources,
he says to himself, the water around it, which has in any case a
shallower origin, does not account for it. Thus all those who attend
the Bayreuth Festival will be felt to be untimely men: their horne is
not in this age but elsewhere, and it is elsewhere too that their
explanation and justification is to be found. It has grown ever clearer
to me that the 'cultivated person', insofar a,he is wholly the product
of this present age, can approach all that Wagner does and thinks
only when it is presented to him in the shape of parody - as every­
thing Wagner does and thinks has indeed been parodied - and that
he will let the event at Bayreuth too be illumined for him only by the
very unmagical lantern of our facetious newspaper journalists. And
we shall be lucky if it stops at parody! For there is in it a spirit of
alienation and hostility that could seek quite different ways of dis­
charging itself, and has on occasion done so. Such an uncommon
degree of sharpness and tension between opposites would likewise
attract the attention of this cultural observer. That a single individual
could, in the course of an average human lifespan, produce some­
thing altogether new may well excite the indignation of those who
cleave to the gradualness of all evolution as though to a kind of moral
law: they themselves are slow and demand slowness in others - and
here they see someone moving very fast, do not know how he does it,
and are angry with him. For such an undertaking as that at Bayreuth
there were no warning signs, no transitional events, nothing inter­
mediate; the long path to the goal, and the goal itself, none knew but
Wagner. It is the first circumnavigation of the world in the domain of
'" Spoken at the ceremony attending the laying of the foundation stone of the
Festival Theatre at Bayreuth.
1 98
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
art: as a result of which, as it seems, there has been discovered not
only a new art but an itself. All the arts of modern times have, as
isolated and stunted or as luxury arts, been almost disvalued; and
the uncertain, ill coordinated recollections of a true art which we
moderns have derived from the Greeks may now also rest in peace,
except insofar as they are now able to shine of themselves in the light
of a new understanding. For many things the time has come to die
out; this new art is a prophet which sees the end approaching for
other things than the arts. Its admonishing hand must make a very
disquieting impression upon our entire contemporary culture as
soon as the laughter provoked by parodies of it has subsided: let the
merriment go on for a little while yet!
We, on the other hand, we disciples of an resurrected, will have
the time and the will for profound, serious reflection! The noise and
chatter which has hitherto gone on about an we are bound to find
shamelessly imponunate from now on; everything imposes upon us
silence, the five-year silence of the Pythagoreans. Who of us has not
dirtied his hands and heart in the service of the idols of modern cul­
ture? Who is not in need of the water of purification, who does not
hear the voice that admonished him: be silent and be cleansed! be
silent and be cleansed! Only as those who listen to this voice are we
also granted the mighty insight with which we have to view the event at
Bayreuth, and only in this insight does there lie the mighty future of
that event.
When on that day in the May of 1 872 the foundation stone was laid
on the hill at Bayreuth amid pouring rain and under a darkened sky,
Wagner drove with some of us back to the town; he was silent and he
seemed to be gazing into himself with a look not to be described in
words. It was the first day of his sixtieth year: everything that had
gone before was a preparation for this moment. We know that at
times of exceptional danger, or in general at any decisive turning­
point of their lives, men compress together all they have experienced
in an infinitely accelerated inner panorama, and behold distant
events as sharply as they do the most recent ones. What may Alexander
the Great not have seen in the moment he caused Asia and Europe to
be drunk out of the same cup? What Wagner beheld within him on
that day, however - how he became what he is and what he will be ­
we who are closest to him can to a certain extent also see: and it is
only from this Wagnerian inner view that we shall be able to under­
stand his great deed itself - and with this understanding guarantee its
fruitfulness.
1 99
It would be strange if that which a man can do best and most likes to
do failed to become a visible presence within the total formation of
his life; and in the case of men of exceptional abilities their life must
become not only a reflection of their character, as is the case with
everyone, but first and foremost a reflection of their intellect and of
the capacities most personal to them. The life of the epic poet will
have something of the epic about it
as is the case with Goethe, by
the way, whom the Germans insist, quite wrongly, in seeing as prin­
cipally a lyric poet - and the life of the dramatist will take a
dramatic course.
The dramatic element in Wagner's development is quite unmistak­
able from the moment when his ruling passion became aware of
itself and took his whole nature in its charge: from that time on there
was an end to fumbling, straying, to the proliferation of secondary
shoots, and within the most convoluted courses and often daring
trajectories assumed by his artistic plans there rules a single inner
law, a will, by which they can be expfained, however strange this
explanation will often sound. But there was also a pre-dramatic era
in Wagner's life, that of his childhood and YQuth, and one cannot
pass this era in review without encountering riddles. He himself does
not yet seem to be present at all and that which, with hindsight, one
might perhaps interpret as a sign of his presence appears at first as
the simultaneous existence of qualities which must excite misgivings
rather than hopeful anticipation: a spirit of restlessness, of irritability,
a nervous hastiness in seizing hold upon a hundred different things,
a passionate delight in experiencing moods of almost pathological
intensity, an abrupt transition from the most soulful quietude to
noise and violence. He was held in check by no traditional family
involvement in any particular art: he might as easily have adopted
painting, poetry, acting, music as academic scholarship or an
academic future; and a superficial view of him might suggest that he
was a born dilettante. The little world under whose spell he grew up
was not such as one could have congratulated an artist on having for
a homeland. He was very close to enjoying the perilous pleasure in
the superficial tasting of one thing after another in the intellectual
realm, as he was to the self-conceit engendered by much superficial
knowledge which is commonplace in cities of scholars; his sen­
sibilities were easily aroused and as easily satisfied; wherever the eyes
of the boy rested he saw himself surrounded by a strangely pre-
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
cocious . yet animated existence to which the gaudy world of the
theatre stood in a ludicrous, and the soul-compelling sound of
music in an incomprehensible, contrast. Now, it is in general
remarkable that, when a modern man is gifted with a great talent, he
seldom possesses in his youth and childhood the quality of naivety,
of simply being himself; and that when, in such rare cases as Goethe
and Wagner, he does attain to naivety, he does so in adulthood. The
artist especially, in whom the power of imitation is particularly
strong, must fall prey to the feeble manysidedness of modern life as
to a serious childhood illness; in his youth and childhood · he will
look more like an adult than his real self. The marvellously accurate
archetypal youth who is the Siegfried of the Ring des Nibelungen *
could have been produced only by a man, and by a man moreover
who had found his own youth late in life. And as Wagner's youth
came late, so did his full maturity; so that in this respect at least he is
the opposite of an anticipatory nature.
As soon as his spiritual and moral maturity arrives, the drama of
his life also begins. And how different he looks now! H is nature
appears in a fearful way simplified, torn apart into two drives or
spheres. Below there rages the precipitate current of a vehement will
which as it were strives to reach up to the light through every runway,
cave and crevice, and desires power. Only a force wholly pure and
free could direct this will on to the pathway to the good and
benevolent; had it been united with a narrow spirit, such an
unbridled tyrannical will could have become a fatality; and a way out
into the open, into air and sunlight, was in any event bound to be
found soon. A mighty striving conscious of repeated failure makes
one bad; inadequacy can sometimes be inherent in circumstances,
* The Nibelung'S Ring, the tetralogy for the performance of which Wagner designed
and erected the Festival Theatre at Bayreuth, in Bavaria, and the first performance of
which inaugurated the Bayreuth Festival. Wagner designated the Ring a 'Stage Festival
Drama for Three Days and a Fore-Evening'. The 'Fore-Evening' is Das Rheingold (The
Rhine-Gold), a music-drama in a single act (four scenes); the first 'day' is Die Walkilre
(The Valkyrie), a music-drama in three acts; the second 'day' is Siegfried, also in three
acts; and the third 'day' is GOtterdammerung (Twilight of the Gods), in three acts and a
prologue. The whole work takes between 1 5  and 1 6  hours to perform, depending on
the tempo of performance, and is the longest musical composition in existence (The
Rhine-Gold, which runs for about two-and-a-half hours, is the longest uninterrupted
musical movement). The present essay was published in July 1 876 to coincide with
the inauguration of the festival, which took place on 13, 14, 1 6  and 1 7  August with the
first public performance of the Ring.
20 1
in the unalterability of fate, and not in lack of force; but he who can­
not cease from striving in spite of this insufficiency becomes as it
were embittered and thus irritable and unjust. Perhaps he seeks the
cause of his lack of success in others; he can, indeed, with a
passionate hatred treat all the world as being to blame for it; perhaps
he goes off defiantly along sidepaths and into subterfuges, or takes to
violence: thus it happens that benevolent natures turn savage on
their way to a laudable goal. Even among those whose objective is
only their own moral purification, among hermits and monks, there
are to be found such savage and morbid men, hollowed out and con­
sumed by failure. It was a spirit full of love, with voice overllowing
with goodness and sweetness, with a hatred of violence and self­
destruction, which desires to see no one in chains - it was such a
spirit that spoke to Wagner. It descended upon him, covered him
with its wings, and showed him the path. We are now taking a look
into the other sphere of Wagner's nature: but how are we to
describe it?
The figures which an artist creates art not he himself, but a suc­
cession of figures upon whom he has patently bestowed his love
does tell us at any rate something about the artist himself. Now call
to mind Rienzi, the Flying Dutchman and Senta, Tannhanser and
Elizabeth, Lohengrin and Elsa, Tristan and Marke, Hans Sachs,
Wotan and Briinnhilde: there passes through all of them a subter­
ranean current of moral ennoblement and enlargement which
unites them, a current which flows ever more clear and pure - and
here, if with shy reserve, we stand before a development in the inner­
most recesses of Wagner's own soul. In what artist can we perceive
anything similar at a similar peak of greatness? Schiller's figures,
from the Robbers to Wallenstein and Tell, go through such a course
of ennoblement and likewise express something of the development
of their creator, but Wagner's standard is higher and the course is
longer. Everything participates in this purification and expresses it,
not only the myth but also the music; in the Ring des Nibelungen I dis­
cover the most moral music I know, for example when Briinnhilde is
awoken by Siegfried; here he attains to an elevation and sanctity of
mood that makes us think of the glowing ice- and snow-covered
peaks of the Alps, so pure, solitary, inaccessible, chaste and bathed
in the light oflove does nature appear here; clouds and storms, even
the sublime itself, are beneath it. Looking back from this vantage
point upon Tannhauser and the Dutchman, we feel how Wagner
evolved: how he started darkly and restlessly, how he stormily
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
sought relief, strove for power and intoxication, often flew back in
disgust, how he wanted to throw off his burden, longed to forget, to
deny, to renounce - the entire stream plunged now into this valley,
now into that, and bored its way into the darkest ravines: - in the
night of this half-subterranean turmoil a star appeared high above
him shining with a sad light, and he named it for what he recognized
it to be: loyalty, selfless loyalty! Why did it seem to him to shine more
brightly and purely than any other? what secret does the word
loyalty hold for his whole being? For the image and problem of
loyalty is impressed upon everything he thought and created; there
exists in his works a virtually complete series of all possible kinds of
loyalty, the most glorious and rarest among them: loyalty of brother
to sister, of friend to friend, of servant to master, Elizabeth to
Tannhauser, Senta to the Dutchman, Elsa to Lohengrin, Isolde,
Kurwenal and Marke to Tristan, Briinnhilde to Wotan's innermost
desire - to make only a start on the series. It is the most personal
primal event that Wagner experiences within himself and reveres
like a religious mystery: he expresses it in the word loyalty and he
never wearies of displaying it in a hundred shapes and, in the abun­
dance of his gratitude, of bestowing upon it the finest things he
possesses and the finest he can do - that marvellous experience and
recognition that one sphere of his being remains loyal to the other,
shows loyalty out of free and most selfless love, the creative, inno­
cent, more illuminated sphere to the dark, intractable and
tyrannical.
It was in the relationship of these two profound forces with one
another, in the surrender of the one to the other, that there lay the
great necessity which had to be fulfilled if he was to be whole and
wholly himself: at the same time it was the only act that did not lie in
his own power, which he could only watch and endure, while the
possibility of seduction to disloyalty, and the frightful danger it rep­
resented to him, was always present. In the uncertainty that thus
arose there lay an abundant source of suffering. Each of his drives
strove without limit, each of his talents, joyful in its existence, wanted
to tear itself free from the others and satisfy itself individually; the
greater their abundance, the greater was the tumult and the greater
the hostility when they crossed one another. In addition there was
the impulse, deriving from chance and from life itself, to acquire
power, fame, pleasure, and he was tormented even more frequendy
by the inexorable need to earn a living: traps and fetters lay
everywhere. How is it possible to stay loyal, to remain whole, under
these conditions? - This doubt often overcame him, and then, as
would happen with an artist, found expression in the figures of his
art: Elizabeth can only suffer, pray and die for Tannhauser, she saves
the restless and immoderate man through her loyalty, but not for
this life. Danger and despair lie in wait for every true artist thrown
into the modern world. He can acquire honours and power in many
forms, he is frequently offered peace and contentment, but always
only in the shape in which they are known to modern man and in
which to the honest artist they must become choking foul air. It is in
the temptation to this, and likewise in resistance to this temptation,
that his danger lies; in disgust with the modern manner of acquiring
pleasure and reputation, in rage at all self-seeking contentment in
the manner of modern man. Think of him occupying an official
position, as Wagner had to fill the office of conductor at town and
court theatres; we can see how the mostiierious artist will try forcibly
to impose seriousness on the institution of which he is part, an
institution which has, however, been constructed frivolously and
demands frivolity almost as a matter of principle; how he partially
succeeds but in the end always fails; how he begins to feel disgust
and wants to flee; how he fails to find anywhere to flee to, and is again
and again obliged to return to the gypsies and outcasts of our culture
as one of them. If he frees himself from one situation he rarely finds
a better, and sometimes he is plunged into the direst need. Thus
Wagner moves from town to town, companion to companion, country
to country, and one hardly knows what it was in each of them that
kept him there for as long as it did. A heavy atmosphere lies over the
greater part of his life hitherto; he seems to have abandoned any
general hopes and to have lived from day to day: and thus he eluded
despair, but at the price of abandoning belief. He must often have
felt like a· wanderer in the night, heavily burdened and profoundly
exhausted, who is yet each night revitalized; sudden death then
appeared to his eyes, not as something to fear, but as an alluring
spectre. Burden, pathway and night, all gone in a trice! - that was a
seductive idea. A hundred times he threw himself back into life with
short-breathed hope and put all spectres behind him. But he almost
always did so with an immoderation which revealed that he placed
no great faith in this hope but was only intoxicating himself with it.
The contrast between his desires and his incapacity to fulfil them was
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
a goad tormenting him; exasperated by continual deprivation, his
judgment gave way to excess whenever his poverty was for once sud­
denly eased. His life became ever more complicated; but the
expedients by means of which he handled it became ever bolder and
more inventive, though they were in fact merely the emergency
actions of the dramatist, designed to deceive only for a moment. As
soon as he needs them he has them, and they are used up just as
quickly. Seen from close to and without love, Wagner's life has, to
recall an idea of Schopenhauer's, much of the comedy about it, and
markedly grotesque comedy at that. How the feeling and recog­
nition that whole stretches of his life are marked by a grotesque lack
of dignity must affect an artist who, more than any other, can breathe
freely only in the sublime and more than sublime - that is something
for the thinker to reflect on.
In the midst of all this activity, of which only a detailed account
can evoke the degree of pity, horror and admiration it deserves,
there was unfolded a talent for learning quite extraordinary even
among Germans, the nation most gifted in learning; and in this
talent there again appeared a danger even greater than that attending
a life apparently unstable and rootless and confusedly directed by
restless illusion. From an experimenting novice Wagner grew into
an omniscient master of music and of the stage and in all technical
matters an innovator and developer. No one will any longer contest
that he has provided the supreme model for all art in the grand man­
ner. But he became even more, and to become it he was spared as little
as anyone else would be the task of appropriating to himself all that
is highest in culture. And how he did it! It is a joy to see; he acqttired
and absorbed it from all sides, and the bigger and heavier the struc­
ture became, the firmer grew the arch of thought that was to order
and control it. And yet it has rarely been made so hard for anyone to
discover the way into the sciences and skills, and often he had to
improvise these ways in for himself. The rejuvenator of the simple
drama, the discoverer of the place of the arts in a true human society,
the poetic elucidator of past philosophies of life, the philosopher,
the historian, the aesthetician and critic, the master oflanguage, the
mythologist and my tho-poet who for the first time enclosed the
whole glorious, primeval structure within a ring and carved upon it
the runes of his spirit - what an abundance of knowledge Wagner
had to assemble and encompass to be able to become all that! And
yet the weight of it as a whole did not stifle his will to action, nor did
the attractions of its individual aspects entice him aside. To judge
how uncommon such a posture is, one should compare it with that
of its great counter-example, Goethe, who, as a learner and man of
knowledge, appears like a many-branched river system which fails to
sustain its full force as far as the sea but loses and scatters at least as
much on its windings and meanderings as it bears on to its estuary. It
is true that such a nature as Goethe's has and gives more enj oyment,
something mild and nobly prodigal hovers about it, whereas the
violence of Wagner's current may terrify and scare one away. But let
him who will be afraid: we others shall take courage from the sight of
a hero who, even in regard to modern culture, 'has not learned
fear'. *
Just as little has he learned to let himself be placated by history
and philosophy, to allow their softening and quietist effects to
operate upon him. Neither the creative nor the embattled artist was
deflected from his course by the force of what he had learned or the
act oflearning itself. As soon as his creative power takes hold on him
history becomes malleable clay in his hands; his relationship
towards it suddenly becomes quite di,ierent from that of any
scholar, it becomes similar to that of the Greek towards his myths,
that is to say towards something which offers material for plastic and
poetic invention, performed with love and a certain shy devotion, to
be sure, but nonetheless also with the magisterial right of the creator.
And precisely because it is to him even more flexible and changeable
than any dream, he can transform a single event into something that
typifies whole ages and thus achieve a truth of representation such as
the historian can never attain to. Where else has the courtly Middle
. Ages been transformed into a flesh-and-blood figure as it has in
Lohengrin? And will the Meistersinger not speak of the German
nature to all future ages - more, will it not constitute one of the ripest
fruits of that nature, which always seeks reformation not revolution,
and though broadly content with itself has not forgotten that noblest
expression of discontent, the innovative deed?
And it was to precisely this kind of discontent that Wagner was
compelled again and again by his involvement with history and
philosophy: he discovered here, not only weapons and armour, but
also and above all the inspiring afflatus that wafts from the tombs of
all great warriors, of all great sufferers and thinkers. One cannot
stand out more clearly from the whole contemporary age than
through the way one employs history and philosophy. The former,
'" A phrase from Siegfried.
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
as it is commonly understood, now seems to have been assigned the
task of letting modern man catch his breath as he runs panting and
sweating towards his goal, so that for a moment he can feel as it were
unharnessed. What the individual Montaigne signifies within the
agitation of the spirit of the Reformation, a coming to rest within
oneself, a peaceful being for oneself and relaxation - and that was
certainly how his best reader, Shakespeare, experienced him - is
what history is for the modern spirit. If the Gennans have for a cen­
tury been especially devoted to the study of history, this shows that
within the agitation of the contemporary world they represent the
retarding, delaying, pacifying power: which some might perhaps
turn into a commendation of them. On the whole, however, it is a
dangerous sign when the spiritual struggles of a people are con­
cerned principally with the past, a mark of debility, of regression and
feebleness: so that it is exposƊd in the most dangerous fashion to
every rampant fever going, the political fever for instance. In the his­
tory of the modern spirit our scholars represent such a condition of
weakness, in antithesis to all revolutionary and refonn movements;
the task they have set themselves is not the proudest, but they have
secured for themselves a kind of peaceable happiness. Every freer,
more manly step goes past them, to be sure - though by no means
past history itself! The latter has quite different forces within it, a fact
realized by precisely such natures as Wagner: only it has to be written
in a much more serious, much stricter manner, out of a mighty soul
and in general no longer optimistically, as it always has been
hitherto; differendy, that is to say, from how German scholars have
written it up to now. There is something palliative, obsequious and
contented about all their work, and they approve of the way things
are. It is a great deal if one of them lets it be seen that he is contented
only because things could have been worse: most of them involun­
tarily believe that the way things have turned out is very good. Ifhistory
were not still a disguised Christian theodicy, if it were written with
more justice and warmth of feeling, it would truly be of no use
whatever for the purpose to which it is now put: to serve as an opiate
for everything revolutionary and innovative. Philosophy is in a
similar situation: all most people want to learn from it is a rough -
very rough! - understanding of the world, so as then to accom­
modate themselves to the world. And even its noblest representatives
emphasize so strongly its power to soothe and console that the
indolent and those who long for rest must think they are seeking the
same thing philosophy is seeking. To me, on the other hand, the
most vital of questions for philosophy appears to be to what extent
the character ofthe world is unalterable: so as, once this question has
been answered, to set about improving that part olit recognized as alterable
with the most ruthless courage. True philosophers themselves teach
this lesson, through the fact that they have worked to improve the
very much alterable judgments of mankind and have not kept their
wisdom to themselves; it is also taught by those true disciples of true
philosophers who, like Wagner, know how to imbibe from them an
enhanced resolution and inflexibility but no soporific juices.
Wagner is most a philosopher when he is most energetic and heroic.
And it was precisely as a philosopher that he passed through not
only the fire of various philosophical systems without feeling fear,
but also through the smoke of scholarly knowledge, and remained
loyal to his higher self, which demanded of him deeds in which his
manyfaceted nature participated as a whole and bade him suffer and learn
so as to be capable of these deeds.
b
The history of the evolution of culture since the Greeks is short
enough, if one takes into account the actual distance covered and
ignores the halts, regressions, hesitatio.ns and lingerings. The
Hellenization of the world and, to make this possible, the orien­
talization of the Hellenic - the twofold task of the great Alexander ­
is still the last great event; the old question whether a culture can be
transplanted to a foreign soil at all is still the problem over which the
moderns weary themselves. The rhythmic play against one another
of these two factors is what has especially determined the course of
history hitheno. Here Christianity, for example, appears as a piece
of oriental antiquity, thought and worked through by men with
excessive thoroughness. As its influence has waned, the power of the
Hellenic cultural world has again increased; we experience
phenomena which are so peculiar they would hang in the air incom­
prehensible to us if we could not look back over a tremendous space
of time and connect them with their Greek counterparts. Thus there
are between Kant and the Eleatics, >:< Schopenhauer and Empedocles,
Aeschylus and Richard Wagner such approximations and affinities
#The Eleatics: the followers of the pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides (born
about 5 1 0  Bq. the first European metaphysician any of whose writings have
survived.
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
that one is reminded almost palpably of the very relative nature of all
concepts of time: it almost seems as though many things belong
together and time is only a cloud which makes it hard for our eyes to
perceive the fact. The history of the exact sciences especially evokes
the impression that we even now stand in the closest proximity to the
Alexandrian-Hellenic world and that the pendulum of history has
swung back to the point from which it started its swing into
enigmatic distant and lost horizons. The picture presented by our
contemporary world is certainly not a novel one: to him who knows
history it must seem more and more as though he were recognizing
the old familiar features of a face. The spirit of Hellenic culture lies
endlessly dispersed over our present-day world: while forces of all
kinds crowd fOlWard and the fruits of the modern sciences and
accomplishments are bartered, the pale features of the Hellenic
appear ghostlike in the distance. The earth, which has now been suf­
ficiently orientalized, longs again for the Hellenic; he who wants to
assist here has need of speed and a winged foot, to be sure, if he is to
bring together all the manifold disseminated points of knowledge,
the remotest continents of talent, to run through and command the
whole tremendous region. Thus it iĒ that we now have need of a
series of counter-Alexanders possessing the mighty capacity to draw
together and unite, to reach the remotest threads and to preserve the
web from being blown away. Not to cut the Gordian knot, as Alexander
did, so that its ends fluttered to all the corners of the earth, butto tie it
again - that is now the task. I recognize in Wagner such a counter­
Alexander: he unites what was separate, feeble and inactive; if a
medicinal expression is permitted, he possesses an astringent power:
to this extent he is one of the truly great cultural masters. He is master
of the arts, the religions, the histories of the various nations, yet he is
the opposite of a polyhistor, a spirit who only brings together and
arranges: for he is one who unites what he has brought together into
a living structure, a simplifier of the world. One will not misunderstand
such an idea if one compares this most general task set for him by his
genius with the much narrower one which the name of Wagner
usually calls to mind. What is expected of him is a reform of the
theatre: supposing he achieved it, what would thereby have been
accomplished for that higher and remoter task?
Certainly modern man would have been altered and reformed:
everything in our modern world is so dependent on everything else
that to remove a single nail is to make the whole building tremble
and collapse. This may seem an exaggerated thing to say of the
Wagnerian reform, yet any real reform could be expected to lead to a
similar result. It is quite impossible to produce the highest and
purest effect of which the art of the theatre is capable without at the
same time effecting innovations everywhere, in morality and
politics, in education and society. Love and justice grown mighty in
one domain, in this instance that of art, must in accordance with the
law of their inner compulsion extend themselves into other domains
and cannot return to the inert condition of their former chrysalis
stage. Even to grasp the extent to which the relationship of our arts to
life is a symbol of the degeneration of this life, the extent to which
our theatre is a disgrace to those who maintain and frequent it, one
has to adopt a completely new viewpoint and be able for once to
regard the commonplace and everyday as something very uncommon
and complex. Strangely clouded judgment, ill-dissembled thirst for
amusement, for distraction at any cost, scholarly considerations,
pomposity and affectation on the part of the performers, brutal
greed for money on that of the proprietors, vacuity and thoughtless­
ness on that of a society which thinks of theƝeople only insofar as it is
employable or dangerous to it and attends concerts and the theatre
without any notion of possessing a duty towards them
all this
together constitutes the musty corrupted air of our world of art
today: but if one is as accustomed to it as our cultivated people are,
one no doubt believes it necessary for one's health and feels ill if de­
prived of it for any length of time. There is really only one short way
of convincing oneself of how vulgar, how peculiarly and oddly
vulgar, our theatrical institutions are, and that is to compare them
with the former reality of the Greek theatre. If we knew nothing of
the Greeks, then the conditions that now obtain would perhaps be
unavoidable and the kind of objections first raised in the grand man­
ner by Wagner would be regarded as the dreams of dwellers in the
land of nowhere. The way people are, it might perhaps be said, the
kind of art we have is satisfactory and suited to them - and they have
never been any different! - But they most certainly have been dif­
ferent, and even now there are people who are not satisfied with our
present institutions - as the fact of Bayreuth itself demonstrates.
Here you will discover spectators prepared and dedicated, people
with the feeling of being at the summit of their happiness and that
.their whole nature is being pulled together for yet higher and wider
endeavours; here you will discover the most devoted self-sacrifice on
the part of the artists and, the spectacle of all spectacles, the vic­
torious creator of a work which is itself the epitome of an abundance
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
of victorious artistic deeds. Must it not seem almost like magic to
encounter such a phenomenon in the world of today? Must not
those who are permitted to participate in it not be transformed and
renewed, so as henceforth to transform and renew in other domains
of life? Has a harbour not been reached after the desert expanse of
the sea, does a stillness not lie over the water here? - When he who
. has experienced the profound and solitary mood which reigns here
returns to the shallows and lowlands of life, must he not ask with
Isolde: 'How could I have endured it? How do I endure it now?' *
And if he cannot endure to keep his happiness and unhappiness
selfishly to himself, he will henceforth seize every opportunity to
bear witness through his actions. Where are those who suffer on
account of the institutions of the present? he will ask. Where are our
natural allies, together with whom we can fight against the rampant
aggression of contemporary bogus culture? For at present - at present!
- we have only one enemy, those 'cultivated people' for whom the
word 'Bayreuth' signifies one of their most shattering defeats - they
rendered no assistance, they raged against it, or they exhibited that
even more effective hardness-of-hearing which has now become a
customary weapon of refined opposition. But the fact that their
enmity and malice was incapable of destroying Wagner or of hindering
his work teaches us one more thing: it betrays that they are weak and
that the resistance of the former rulers will no longer be able to
withstand many more attacks. The time has come for those who
want conquest and victory, the greatest domains lie open, and
wherever there are possessions a question-mark is set against the
name of the possessor. Thus the structure of education, for example,
has been recognized as rotten, and everywhere there are those who
have already silently quitted it. If only those who are already in fact
profoundly disaffected could be incited to a public declaration and
to public indignation! If only they could be roused out of their de­
spairing despondency! I know that if one were to deduct what these
natures contribute to the proceeds of our whole system of culture,
the latter would be subjected to the most enfeebling blood-letting
imaginable. Of the scholars, for example, only those infected with
the political mania and the literary scribblers of all kinds would be
left behind under the old regime. The repellent structure which now
derives its strength from the spheres of power and injustice, from the
state and society, and sees its advantage in rendering the latter ever
*From Tristan und Isolde.
21 1
more evil and ruthless, would without it be something feeble and
weary: at the first sign of open contempt it would collapse. He who
fights for love and justice between men has least to fear from it: for it
is only when he has come to the end of the struggle he is now waging
against their advanced guard, the culture of today, that he will
encounter his real enemies.
To us, Bayreuth signifies the morning consecration on the day of
battle. We could not be done a greater injustice than if it were
assumed we were concerned only with art: as though it were a kind of
cure and intoxicant with the aid of which one could rid oneself of
every other sickness. What we see depicted in the tragic art-work of
Bayreuth is the struggle of the individual against everything that
opposes him as apparently invincible necessity, with power, law,
tradition, compact and the whole prevailing order of things. The
individual cannot live more fairly than in being prepared to die in
the struggle for love and justice and in sacrificing himself to it. The
glance with which the mysterious eye of tragedy gazes upon us is no
sorcery that prostrates us and paralyses (jUr limbs. Even though it
demands that we be quiet so long as it is gazing upon us - for art does
not exist for the struggle itself, but for the intervals of quiet before
and in the midst of it, for those moments when, glancing behind and
looking ahead, we comprehend the symbolic, when feelings of tired­
ness which overcome us are attended by a refreshing dream. Day
and the battle dawn together, the sacred shadows disperse and art is
again far distant from us; but its morning consolation lies upon us
still. For the individual discovers everywhere else nothing but what is
personally dissatisfying and impervious to him: how could he fight
with any kind of courage if he had not first been consecrated to
something higher than his own person! The greatest causes of suffering
there are for the individual - that men do not share all knowledge in
common, that ultimate insight can never be certain, that abilities are
divided unequally - all this puts him in need of art. We cannot be
happy so long as everything around us suffers and creates suffering;
we cannot be moral so long as the course of human affairs is deter­
mined by force, deception and injustice; we cannot even be wise so
long as the whole of mankind has not struggled in competition for
wisdom and conducted the individual into life and knowledge in the
. way dictated by wisdom. How could we endure to live in the feeling
of this threefold incapacity if we were unable to recognize in our
struggles, striving and failures something sublime and significant
and did not learn from tragedy to take delight in the rhythm of grand
passion and in its victim. Art is, to be sure, no instructor or educator
2 1 2
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
in direct action; the artist is never an educator or counsellor in this
sense; the objectives for which the tragic hero strives are not without
further ado the things worth striving for per se. Our evaluation of
things so long as we are firmly under the spell of art is different, as it
is in a dream: that which, while the spell lasts, we consider so much
worth striving for that we ally ourselves with the hero when he pre­
fers to die rather than renounce it - in real life this is seldom of the
same value or worthy of the same degree of effort: that is precisely
why art is the activity of man in repose. The struggles it depicts are
simplifications of the real struggles oflife; its problems are abbrevi­
ations of the endlessly complex calculus of human action and desire.
But the greatness and indispensability of art lie precisely in its being
able to produce the appearance of a simpler world, a shorter solution
of the riddle oflife. No one who suffers from life can do without this
appearance, just as no one can do without sleep. The harder it
becomes to know the laws of life, the more ardently do we long for
this appearance of simplification, even if only for moments, the
greater grows the tension between general knowledge of things and
tht.! individual's spiritual-moral capacities. Art exists so that the bow
shall not break.
The individual must be consecrated to something higher than
himself - that is the meaning of tragedy; he must be free of the ter­
rible anxiety which death and time evoke in the individual: for at any
moment, in the briefest atom of his life's course, he may encounter
something holy that endlessly outweighs all his struggle and all his
distress - this is what it means to have a sense for the tragic; all the
ennoblement of mankind is enclosed in this. supreme task; the
definite rejection of this task would be the saddest picture imagin­
able to a friend of man. That is my view of things!' There is only one
hope and one guarantee for the future of humanity: it consists in his
retention of the sense for the tragic. An unheard-of cry of distress would
resound across the earth if mankind should ever lose it completely;
and, conversely, there is no more rapturous joy than to know what
we know - that the tragic idea has again been born into the world.
For this joy is altogether universal and suprapersonal, the rejoicing
of mankind at the guarantee of the unity and continuance of the
human as such.
Wagner subjected the life of the present and the past to the illumi­
nation of an insight strong enough to penetrate to uncommonly
2 1 3
remote regions: that is why he can be called a simplifier of the world,
for simplification of the world consists in being able to view and thus
master the tremendous abundance of an apparently chaotic wilder­
ness and to bring together in unity that which was formerly thought
to be set irreconcilably asunder. Wagner did this by discovering a
relationship between two things which appeared to be completely
alien to one another as though they dwelt in different spheres: be­
tween music and life, and likewise between music and drama. He did not
invent or create these relationships: they are there, lying in
everybody's path, just as every great problem is like the precious
stone which thousands walk over before one finally picks it up. What
does it signify, Wagner asked himself, that precisely such an art as
music should have arisen with such incomparable force in the life of
modern man? It is not at all necessary to have a low opinion of this
life in order to perceive a problem here; no, when one considers all
the great forces pertaining to this life and pictures to oneself an exist­
ence striving mightily upwards and struggling for conscious freedom
and independence of tlwught - only then does music appear truly an
enigma in this world. Must one not say that music could not arise out
of this age! But what then is the meaning of its existence? Is it a
chance event? A single great artist might be a chance event, certainly;
but the appearance of a series of great artists such as the history of
modern music discloses - a series equalled only once before, in the
age of the Greeks - makes one think it is not chance but necessity that
rules here. This necessity is precisely the problem to which Wagner
furnishes an answer.
First of all he recognized a state of distress extending as far as
civilization now unites nations: everywhere language is sick, and the
oppression of this tremendous sickness weighs on the whole of
human development. Inasmuch as language has had continually to
climb up to the highest rung of achievement possible to it so as to
encompass the realm of thought - a realm diametrically opposed to
that for the expression of which it was originally supremely adapted,
namely the realm of strong feelings
it has during the brief period of
contemporary civilization become exhausted through this excessive
effort: so that now it is no longer capable of performing that function
for the sake of which alone it exists: to enable suffering mankind to
corne to an understanding with one another over the simplest needs
oflife. Man can no longer express his needs and distress by means of
language, thus he can no longer really communicate at all: and
under these dimly perceived conditions language has everywhere
2 1 4
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
become a power in its own right which now embraces mankind with
ghostly arms and impels it to where it does not really want to go. As
soon as men seek to come to an understanding with one another,
and to unite for a common work, they are seized by the madness of
universal concepts, indeed even by the mere sounds of words, and,
as a consequence of this incapacity to communicate, everything they
do together bears the mark of this lack of mutual understanding,
inasmuch as it does not correspond to their real needs but only to
the hollowness of those tyrannical words and concepts: thus to all its
other sufferings mankind adds suffering from convention, that is to say
from a mutual agreement as to words and actions without a mutual
agreement as to feelings. Just as when every art goes into decline a
point is reached at which its morbidly luxuriant forms and tech­
niques gain a tyrannical domination over the souls of youthful artists
and make them their slaves, so with the decline of language we are
the slaves of words; under this constraint no one is any longer capable
of revealing himself, of speaking naively, and few are capable of pre­
serving their individuality at all in the face of an education which
believes it demonstrates its success, not in going out to meet clear
needs and feelings in an educative sense, but in entangling the
individual in the net of 'clear concepts' and teaching him to think
correctly: as if there were any sense whatever in making of a man a
being who thinks · and concludes correctly if one has not first suc­
ceeded in making of him one who feels rightly. Now when the music
of our German masters resounds in the ears of mankind injured to
this extent, what is it really that here becomes audible? Precisely this
right feeling, the enemy of all convention, all artificial alienation and
incomprehension between man and man: this music is a return to
nature, while being at the same time the purification and transform­
ation of nature; for the pressing need for that return to nature arose
in the souls of men filled with love, and in their art there sounds nature
transformed· in love:
Let us take this to be one of Wagner' s answers to the question Ƌs to
what music signifies in our time: he also has a second. The
relationship between music and life is not only that of one kind of
language to another kind of language, it is also the relationship be­
tween the perfect world of sound and the totality of the world of
sight. Regarded as a phenomenon for the eyes, however, and com­
pared with the phenomena of life of earlier times, the existence of
modern men exhibits an unspeakable poverty and exhaustion, de­
spite the unspeakable gaudiness which can give pleasure only to the
2 1 5
-\
I
most superficial glance. If one looks a little more closely and
analyses the impression made by this vigorously agitated play of
colours, does the whole not appear as the glitter and sparkle of
countless little stones and fragments borrowed from earlier cul­
tures? Is everything here not inappropriate pomp, imitated activity,
presumptuous superficiality? A suit of gaudy patches for the naked
and freezing? A dance of seemingjoy exacted from sufferers? An air
of haughty pride worn by one wounded to the depths? And amid it
all, concealed and dissembled only by the rapidity of the movement
and confusion
hoary impotence, nagging discontent, industrious
boredom, dishonourable wretchedness! The phenomenon of mod­
ern man has become wholly appearance; he is not visible in what he
represents but rather concealed by it; and the remnant of artistic
inventiveness retained by a nation, by the French and Italians for
instance, is employed in this art of concealment. Wherever 'form' is
nowadays demanded, in society and in conversation, in literary
expression, in traffic between states, what is involuntarily understood
by it is a pleasing appearance, the antidlesis of the true concept of
form as shape necessitated by content, which has nothing to do with
'pleasing' or 'displeasing' precisely because it is necessary and not
arbitrary. But even in civilized nations where this form is not
expressly demanded, that necessary shape which is true form is just
as little in evidence: it is only that the striving after a pleasing
appearance has been less successful, even though pursued with at
least as much zeal. For how pleasing the appearance is, in the one case
or the other, and why it must be agreeable to everyone that modem
man at least makes an effort at an appearance, each will decide to the
degree to which he himself is a modern man. ' Only galley-slaves
understand one another', says Tasso, 'but we politely misunderstand
others so that they shall misunderstand us in return.' *
In this world of forms and desired misunderstanding there now
appear souls filled with music - to what purpose? In noble honesty,
in a passion that is suprapersonal, they move to a grand, free rhythm,
they glow with the mighty tranquil fire of the music that wells up
out of inexhaustible depths within them - all this to what purpose?
Through these souls music reaches out to its corresponding
necessary shape in the world of the visible, that is to say, to its
lOIn Goethe's Torquato Tasso, Act 5 Scene 5 (the italicizing of 'misunderstand' is
Nietzsche's).
2 1 6
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
sister, gymnastics: in its search for this it becomes judge over the whole
visible world of the present. This is Wagner's second answer to the
question as to what significance music can have in this age. Help me,
he cries to all who can hear, help me to discove:r that culture whose
existence my music, as the rediscovered language of true feeling,
prophesies; reflect that the soul of music now wants to create for
itself a body, that it seeks its path through all of you to visibility in
movement, deed, structure and morality! There are men who com­
prehend this call, and there will be more and more of them; and they
have also for the first time grasped anew what it means to found the
state upon music, something the ancient Hellenes not only grasped
but also demanded of themselves: whereas they would condemn the
contemporary state as unconditionally as most men now condemn
the church. The path to so new yet not wholly unheard-of a goal leads to
an admission to ourselves that the m,ost shameful shortcoming of
our education and the actual ground of its inability to emerge from
barbarism is its lack of the enlivening and formative soul of music,
and that its demands and institutions are products of a time when
the music from which we expect so much had not yet been born.
Our education is the most backward structure of the present day,
and it is backward precisely in regard to the only new educative force
which contemporary mankind has that previous centuries did not
have - or which they could have if they would cease their mindless
scurrying forward under the lash of the moment! Because they have
up to now not let the soul of music lodge within them, they have as
yet no inkling of gymnastics in the Greek and Wagnerian sense of the
word; and this is again the reason their plastic artists are condemned
to hopelessness so long as they continue to desire to dispense with
music to conduct them into a new visible world: it does not matter
how much talent they have, it will come either too late or too soon
and in any case at the wrong time, for it is superfluous and ineffec­
tive, since the perfect and highest products of former ages, the pat­
tern for our contemporary artists, are themselves superfluous and
almost ineffective and hardly capable now of setting one stone upon
another. If they behold within themselves no new figures before
them but only the old figures behind them, then they may serve his­
tory but they cannot serve life, and they are dead while they are still
breathing: . he who feels true, fruitful life within him, however - and
at present that means music - could he be misled for a moment into
expecting anything further from something that exhausts itself in
figures, forms and styles? He has gone beyond all vanities of this
2 1 7
sort; and he thinks of discovering artistic wonders outside his ideal
world of sound as little as he expects great writers still to emerge
from our exhausted and colourless languages. Rather than giving
ear to any kind of vain consolation, he can endure to direct his pro­
foundly dissatisfied gaze upon our modern world: let him become
full of bitterness and hatred if his heart is not warm enough for pity!
Even malice and mockery is better than that he should, in the manner
of our 'friends of art', give himself over to fraudulent self­
contentment and quiet dipsomania! But even ifhe can do more than
deny and mock, ifhe can love, pity and assist, he must nonetheless at
first deny, so as to create a pathway for his helpful soul. If music is
one day to move many men to piety for music and to acquaint them
with its highest objectives, an end must first be made to all pleasure­
seeking traffic with so sacred an art; the foundation upon which our
artistic entertainments, theatre, museums, concert societies rest,
namely the aforesaid 'friend of art', must be placed under an inter­
dict; the public judgment which lays such peculiar stress on cultivating
this species of friendship for art must be l>eaten from the field by a
better judgment. In the meantime we must count even the declared
enemy of art as a real and useful ally, since that of which he has
declared himself an enemy is precisely art as the 'friend of art'
understands it: for he knows no other! Let him by all means call the
friend of art to account for the senseless squandering of money on
the construction of his theatres and public monuments, the engage­
ment of his 'celebrated' singers and actors, the maintenance of his
wholly unproductive art-schools and picture-galleries: not to speak
. of all the effort, time and money thrown away in every household on
instruction in supposed 'artistic pursuits'. Here there is no hunger
and no satiety, but only an insipid pretence of both designed to mis­
lead the judgment of others; or, even worse, if art is taken relatively
seriously one demands of it the engendering of hunger and desire
and discovers its task to lie precisely in this artificially engendered
excitement. As though one feared perishing through one's own self­
disgust and dullness, one calls up every evil demon so as to be driven
like a deer by these hunters: one thirsts for suffering, anger, passion,
sudden terror, breathless tension, and calls upon the artist as the one
who can conjure up this spectral chase. Within the spiritual
. "household of our cultivated people art is now a wholly spurious or a
shameful, ignominious need, either nothing or something malign.
The better and rarer kind of artist is as though caught up in a
bewildering dream so as not to see all this, and he hesitantly repeats
2 1 8
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
in an uncertain tone ghostly words he thinks he hears coming from
far away but cannot quite grasp; the artist of the modern stamp, on
the other hand, is full of contempt for the dreamy groping of his
nobler colleague and leads the whole brawling crowd of passions
and abominations after him on a string so as to let them loose on
modern men when required: for the latter would rather be hunted,
injured and torn to pieces than have to live quietly alone with them­
selves. Alone with themselves! - the idea of this makes modern souls
quake, it is their kind of terror and fear of ghosts.
When in populous cities I watch the thousands pass by and
behold their gloomy or harried expressions, I tell myself repeatedly
that they must be feeling unwell. But for all these people art exists
merely so that they shall feel even more unwell, even gloomier and
more senseless, or even more harried and greedy. For they are
unremittingly ridden and drilled by false feeling, which in this way
prevents them from admitting to themselves how wretched they are;
if they want to speak, convention whispers something into their ear
which makes them forget what it was they really wanted to say; if they
want to come to an understanding with one another, their own
understanding is paralysed as though by a spell, so that what they
call happiness is really their misfortune and they wilfully collaborate
together to advance their own adversity. Thus they are wholly
transformed and reduced to the helpless slaves of false feeling.
Here are two examples to demonstrate how perverse the sensibilities
of our age have become and how the age has no perception of this
perversity. In former times one looked down with honest nobility on
people who dealt in money as a business, even though one had need
of them; one admitted to oneself that every society had to have intes­
tines. Now, as the most covetous of its regions, they are the ruling
power in the soul of modern humanity. In former times there was
nothing one was warned against more than against taking the day,
the moment, too seriously; one was urged nil admirari and to be con­
cerned with matters of eternity; now only one kind of seriousness
still remains in the modern soul, that directed towards the news
brought by the newspapers or the telegraph. To employ the moment
and, so as to profit from it, to assess its value as quickly as possible! -
one might believe that modern man has retained only one of the vir­
tues, that of presence of mind. Unhappily, it is in truth more like the
2 1 9
omnipresence of a dirty, insatiable greed and a prying curiosity.
Whether mind is now present at all - we shall leave that question to the
judges of the future who will one day put modern man through their
sieve. But that this age is vulgar can be seen already, for it holds in
honour that which former noble ages despised; and if it has appro­
priated to itself all that is valuable in the art and wisdom of the past
and promenades around in this most opulent of all raiment, it shows
an uncanny awareness of its vulgarity in that it employs this cloak not
to keep itself warm, but only to disguise itself. The need to dissemble
and to conceal itself seems more pressing than the need not to be
cold. Thus our contemporary scholars and philosophers do not
employ the wisdom of the Indians and the Greeks so as to grow wise
and calm within themselves: the sole purpose of their work is to
create for the present day an illusory reputation for wisdom. Students
of animal behaviour exert themselves to represent the bestial out­
breaks of violence and cunning and revengefulness in the mutual
relations between contemporary states and men as unalterable laws
of nature. Historians are engaged with inxious assiduity in proving
the proposition that every age possesses rights of its own and its own
conditions of existence - this by way of preparing the basis of the
defence to be presented at the court proceedings which will be
visited upon our age. Theories of the state, of the nation, of the
economy, trade, justice - they all now have the character of a pre­
paratory apologia; it seems, indeed, as though the only task of all active
spirit not used up in propelling the great economy- and power-
machine is the defence and exculpation of the present.
Before what accuser? one asks in perplexity.
Before its own bad conscience.
And the task of modern art, too, suddenly becomes clear:
stupefaction or delirium! To put to sleep or to intoxicate! To silence
the conscience, by one means or the other! To help the modern soul
to forget its feeling of guilt, not to help it to return to innocence! And
this at least for moments at a time! To defend man against himself by
compelling him to silence and to an inability to hear! - the few who
have felt what this most shameful of tasks, this dreadful degradation
of art, really means will find their souls filling to the brim with regret
and pity: but also with a new mighty longing. He who desired to
liberate art, to restore its desecrated sanctity, would first have to have
liberated himself from the modern soul; only when innocent him­
self could he discover the innocence of art, and he thus has two
tremendous acts of purification and consecration to accomplish. If
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
he were victorious, if he spoke to men out of his liberated soul in the
language of his liberated art, only then would he encounter his
greatest danger and his most tremendous battle; men would rather
tear him and his art to pieces than admit they must perish for shame
in the face of them. It is possible that the redemption of art, the only
gleam of light to be hoped for in the modern age, will be an event
reserved to only a couple of solitary souls, while the many continue
to gaze into the flickering and smoky fire of their art: for they do not
want light, they want bedazzlement; they hate light - when it is
thrown upon themselves.
Thus they avoid the new bringer of light; but, constrained by the
love out of which he was born, he pursues them and wants to con­
strain them. 'You shall pass through my mysteries', he cries to them,
'you need their purifications and convulsions. Risk it for the sake of
your salvation and desert for once the dimly lit piece of nature and
life which is all you seem to know; I lead you into a realm that is just
as real, you yourselves shall say when you emerge out of my cave into
your daylight which life is more real, which is really daylight and
which cave. Nature is in its depths much richer, mightier, happier,
more dreadful; in the way you usually live you do not know it: learn
to become nature again yourselves and then with and in nature let
yourselves be transformed by the magic of my love and fire.'
It is the voice of Wagner's art which speaks thus to mankind. That
we children of a wretched age were permitted to be the first to hear it
shows how worthy of pity precisely our age must be, and shows in
general that true music is a piece of fate and primal law; for it is
impossible to derive its appearance at precisely this time from an
empty, meaningless act of chance; a Wagner who appeared by
chance would have been crushed by the superior force of the opposing
element into which he was thrown. But there lies over the evolution
of the real Wagner a transfiguring and justifying necessity. To
behold his art coming into existence is to behold a glorious spectacle,
notwithstanding the suffering that attended it, for reason, law, pur­
pose are evident everywhere. In his joy at this spectacle, the beholder
will laud this suffering itself and reflect with'delight on how primor­
dially determined nature and giftedness must turn everything to
prosperity and gain no matter how hard the school it has to pass
through; how every kind of peril makes it bolder and every victory
more thoughtful; how it feeds on poison and misfortune and grows
strong and healthy in the process. Mockery and contradiction by the
world around it are a goad and a stimulus; if it wanders into error, it
22 1
returns home with the most marvellous booty; if it sleeps, 'its sleep
only gives it new strength'. * It even steals the body and makes it
more robust; it does not consume life however long it lives; it rules
over man like a winged passion and at the moment his foot has
grown weary in the sand or is hurt against a stone it lifts him into the
air. It can do nothing other than communicate, everyone is to
collaborate in its work, it is not niggardly with its gifts. If it is
repulsed, it gives more abundantly; if the recipient misuses it, it adds
to its gifts the most precious jewel it possesses - and the oldest and
most recent experience teaches that the recipients have never been
quite worthy of the gift. Primordially determined nature through
which music speaks to the world of appearance is thus the most
enigmatic thing under the sun, an abyss in which force and goodness
dwell together, a bridge between the self and the non-self. Who can,
clearly name the purpose for which it exists at all, even though it may
be apparent that purposiveness exists in the way it came into being?
But the happiest presentiment may permit us to ask: should the
greater exist for the sake of the less, the,greatest giftedness for the
good of the smallest, the highest virtue and holiness for the sake of
frailty? Did true music not resound because mankind deserved it least
but needed it most? If we let ourselves ponder the boundless miracle of
this possibility and then, out of this reflection, look back on life, we
shall see all flooded in light, however dark and misty it may have
seemed before.
Nothing else is possible: he before whom there stands such a nature
as Wagner's is from time to time compelled to reflect upon himself,
upon his own pettiness and frailty, and to ask himself: what would
this nature have with you? to what end do you really exist? - Probably
he will be unable to find an answer, and will then stand perplexed at
his own being. Let him then be satisfied to have experienced even
this; let him hear in the fact that he feels alienated from his own being the
answer to his question. For it is with precisely this feeling that he par­
ticipates in Wagner's mightiest accomplishment, the central point of
his power, the demonic transmissibility and self-relinquishment of his
, ,nature, with which others are able to communicate just as readily as
it communicates with other natures, and whose greatness consists in
* From Hans Sachs's monologue in Act III of Meistersinger.
."
· r
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
its capacity both to surrender and to receive. By apparently suc­
cumbing to Wagner's overflowing nature, he who reflects upon it
has in fact participated in its energy and has thus as it were through him
acquired power against him; and whoever examines himself closely
knows that even mere contemplation involves a secret antagonism,
the antagonism involved in comparison. If his art allows us to
experience all that a soul encounters when it goes on a journey - par­
ticipation in other souls and their destiny, acquisition of the ability
to look at the world through many eyes - we are then, through
knowledge of such strange and remote things, also made capable of
seeing him himself after having experienced him himself. Then we
feel certain that in Wagner all that is visible in the world wants to
become more profound and more intense by becoming audible,
that it seeks here its lost soul; and that all that is audible in the world
likewise wants to emerge into the light and also become a
phenomenon for the eye; that it wants as it were to acquire cor­
porality. His art always conducts him along this twofold path, from a
world as an audible spectacle into a world as a visible spectacle
enigmatically related to it, and the reverse; he is continually com­
pelled - and the beholder is compelled with him - to translate visible
movement back into soul and primordial life, and conversely to see
the most deeply concealed inner activity as visible phenomenon and
to clothe it with the appearance of a body. All this constitutes the
essence of the dithyrambic dramatist, this concept extended to em brace
at once the actor, poet and composer: as it must be, since it is
necessarily derived from the only perfect exemplar of the dithyrambic
dramatist before Wagner, from Aeschylus and his fellow Greek
artists. If one has tried to see the evolution of the greatest artists as
deriving from inner constraints or lacunae; if, for example, poetry
was for Goethe a kind of substitute for a failed calling as a painter; if
one can speak of Schiller'S plays as being vulgar eloquence redirected;
if Wagner himself seeks to interpret the promotion of music by the
Germans by supposing among other things that, denied the se­
ductive stimulus of a naturally melodious voice, they were com­
pelled to take the art of music with something of the same degree of
seriousness as their religious reformers took Christianity -: so, if one
wanted in a similar way to associate Wagner's evolution with such an
inner constraint, one might assume the existence in him of an
original histrionic talent which had to deny itself satisfaction by the
most obvious and trivial route and which found its expedient and
deliverance in drawing together all the arts into a great histrionic
manifestation. But then one would also have to be allowed to say that
the mightiest musical natures, in despair at having to speak to the
semi- or non-musical, violently forced entry to the other arts so as
finally to communicate themselves with hundredfold clarity and
compel the people to understand them. But, however one may pic­
ture the evolution of the potential dramatist, in his perfect maturity
he is a figure without any kind of constraint or lacunae: the actually
free artist who can do nothing other than think in all the arts at once,
the mediator between and reconciler of spheres apparently divided
from one another, the restorer of a unity and totality to the artistic
faculty which can in no way be divined or arrived at by reasoning,
but only demonstrated through a practical deed. He before whom
this deed is suddenly performed, however, will be overpowered by it
as by the uncanniest, most magnetic magic: all at once he stands
before a power which makes all resistance senseless, which indeed
seems to rob all one's previous life of sense and comprehensibility:
in an ecstasy, we swim in an enigmatic, fiery element, we no longer
know ourself, no longer recognize thi most familiar things; we no
longer possess any standard of measurement, everything fixed and
rigid begins to grow fluid, everything shines in novel colours, speaks
to us in new signs and symbols: - now, involved in this mixture of joy
and fear, one would have to be Plato to be able to resolve as he did
and to say to the dramatist: 'if a man who, by virtue of his wisdom
could become all possible things and imitate all things, should enter
our community, let us revere him as something miraculous and
holy, anoint his head with oil and set a wreath upon it, but then try to
persuade him to go away to another community'. It may be that one
living in the Platonic community can and must persuade himself to
such a thing: all we others, who live in no such community but in
communities constituted quite differently, desire and demand that
the sorcerer should come to us, even though we may fear him - in
order that our community and the false reason and power whose
embodiment it is should for once be denied. A condition of man­
kind, of its communities, moralities, societies, institutions as a
whole, which could do without the imitative artist is perhaps not a
complete impossibility, but this 'perhaps' is one of the boldest there
is and amounts to the same thing as a 'very improbably'; only he
should be permitted to speak of it who could anticipate and realize
in his mind the supreme moment of all time yet to come and then,
like Faust, had to grow blind - had to and had a right to, for we have
no right even to this blindness, whereas Plato for example, after having
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
cast a single glance into the Hellenic ideal, had the right to be blind
to Hellenic reality. We others, on the contrary, need art precisely
because we have evolved looking into the face of reality; and we need pre­
cisely the universal dramatist so that he may, for a few hours at least,
redeem us from the fearful tension which the seeing man nowƒ feels
between himself and the tasks imposed upon him. With him we
ascend to the topmost rung of sensibility and only there do we fancy
we have returned to free nature and the realm of freedom; from this
height we behold, as though in immense air-drawn reflections, our
struggles, victories and defeats as something sublime and signifi­
cant; we have delight in the rhythm of passion and in its victim, with
every mighty step the hero takes we hear the dull echo of death and
in its proximity we sense the supreme stimulus to life:
thus
transformed into tragic men we return to life in a strangely consoled
mood, with a new feeling of security, as though out of supreme
dangers, excesses, ecstasies, we had found our way back to the
limited and familiar: back to where we are now abundantly
benevolent and in any event nobler than we were before; for every­
thing that here appears serious and distressful, as progress towards a
goal, is now, by comparison with the path we ourselves have
traversed, even if only in a dream, more like strangely isolated frag­
ments of that total experience of which we have a terrified recollec­
tion; indeed, we shall run into danger, and be tempted to take life
too easily, precisely because we have taken art so uncommonly
seriously
to allude to an expression with which Wagner charac­
terized the course of his own life. For if we, who can only experience
this art of the dithyrambic dramatist, not create it, find the dream
almost more real than waking actuality, how must the creator of it
evaluate this antithesis! There he stands in the midst of all the noisy
summonses and importunities of the day, of the necessities oflife, of
society, of the state - as what? Perhaps as though he were the only
one awake, the only one aware of the real and true, among confused
and tormented sleepers, among sufferers deluded by fancy; some­
times no doubt he even feels as though a victim of a protracted
sleeplessness, as though condemned to pass a clear and conscious
life in the company of sleepwalkers and creatures of a spectral earn­
estness: so that all that seems everyday to others to him appears
uncanny, and he feels tempted to counter the impression pro­
duced by this phenomenon with exuberant mockery. But this
sensation becomes a peculiar hybrid, when to the brightness of
this exuberance there is joined a quite different impulse, the
longing to descend from the heights into the depths, the living desire
for the earth, for the joy of communion - then, when he recalls all he
is deprived of as a solitary creator, the longing at once to take all that
is weak, human and lost and, like a god come to earth, 'raise it to
Heaven in fiery arms', so as at last to find love and no longer only
worship, and in love to relinquish himself utterlyl The hybrid sen­
sation assumed here is, h owever, the actual miracle in the soul of
the dithyrambic dramatist; and if his nature can be conceptual­
ized anywhere, it must be h ere. For the creative moments in his
art are produced by the tension occasioned by this hybrid, when the
uncanny and exuberant sensation of surprise and amazement at
the world is coupled with the ardent longing to approach this same
world as a lover. Whatever glances he may then cast upon earth and
life, they are always beams of sunlight which 'suck up moisture', con­
gregate mist, spread thunderclouds. His glance falls at once clear­
sighted and lovingly seljless: and everything he now illuminates with the
twofold light of this glance is at once compelled by nature to dis­
charge all its forces with fearful rapidify in a revelation of its most
deeply hidden secrets: and it does so out of shame. It is more than a
figure of speech to say that with this glance he has surprised nature,
that he has seen her naked: so that now she seeks to conceal her
shame by fleeing into her antitheses. What has hitherto been invisible
and inward escapes into the sphere of the visible and becomes
appearance; what was hitherto only visible flees into the dark ocean
of the audible: thus; by seeking to hide herselj; nature reveals the character of
her antitheses. In an impetuously rhythmic yet hovering dance, in
ecstatic gestures, the primordial dramatist speaks of what is now
coming to pass within him and within nature: the dithyramb of his
dance is as much dread understanding and exuberant insight as it is
a loving approach and joyful self-renunciation. Intoxicated, the
word follows in the train of this rhythm; coupled with the word there
sounds the melody; and melody in turn showers its fire into the
realm of images and concepts. A dream apparition, like and unlike
the image of nature and her wooer, floats by, it condenses into more
human forms, it expands as the expression of a wholly heroic
exuberant will, of an ecstatic going-under and cessation of will: -
thus does tragedy come into being, thus there is bestowed upon life
its most glorious form of wisdom, that of the tragic idea, thus there is
at last arose the greatest sorcerer and benefactor of mortals, the
dithyrambic dramatist. -
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
Wagner's actual life, that is to say the gradual revelation of the
dithyrambic dramatist, was at the same time an unceasing struggle
with himself insofar as he was not only a dithyrambic dramatist: his
struggle with the world which resisted him was so furious and
uncanny because he heard this 'world', this bewitching enemy,
speaking out of his own being and because he harboured within
himself a mighty demon of resistance. When the ruling idea of his life
- the idea that an incomparable amount of influence, the greatest
influence of all the arts, could be exercised through the theatre -
seized hold on him, it threw his being into the most violent ferment.
It did not produce an immediate clear decision as to his future
actions and objective; this idea appeared at first almost as a temp­
tation, as an expression of his obscure personal will, which longed
insatiably for power and fame. Influence, incomparable influence -
how? over whom? - that was from now on the question and quest
that ceaselessly occupied his head and heart. He wanted to conquer
and rule as no artist had done before, and if possible to attain with a
single blow that tyrannical omnipotence for which his instincts
obscurely craved. With a jealous, deeply probing glance he scanned
everything that enjoyed success, he observed even more those upon
whom influence had to be exerted. Through the magical eye of the
dramatist, who can read souls as easily as he can the most familiar
writing, he saw to the bottom of the spectators and listeners, and
though he was often disturbed by what he learned he nonetheless
reached at once for the means of mastering it. These means were
always available to him; what produced a strong effect upon him he
was able himself to produce; of his models he understood at every
stage just as much as he was himself able to create, and he never
doubted that he could do whatever he wanted to. In this he is
perhaps an even more 'presumptuous' nature than Goethe, who
said of himself: 'I always believed I had everything; they could have
set a crown upon my head and I would have thought it quite in
order.' Wagner's ability and his 'taste' and likewise his. objective -
these have at all times corresponded as closely to one another as a
key does to a lock: - together they became great and free
but they
were not so at first. What to him were the feeble, noble yet selfishly
solitary sensations experienced far from the great crowd by this or
that friend of art educated in literature and aesthetically refined? But
those violent storms of the soul produced by the great crowd when
dramatic song rises in intensity, that sudden explosiv
'e intoxication
of spirit, honest through and through and selfless - that was the echo
of his own feeling and experience, and when he heard it he was per­
meated with a glowing anticipation of supreme power and
influence! Thus it was he came to understand that grand opera was the
means through which he could give expression to his ruling idea; his
desire drew him towards it, his eyes turned in the direction of its
home. A long period of his life, together with the daring changes and
alterations his plans, studies, places of residence, acquaintanceships
underwent, are explicable only by reference to this desire and to the
external resistance the needy, restless, passionately naive German
artist was bound to encounter. Another artist understood better how
to become master in this domain; and now it has gradually become
known with what an intricate web of influences of every kind Meyerbeer
prepared and achieved each of his great victories, and with what
scru·pulous care he weighed the succession of 'effects' in the opera
itself, it is also possible to understand how shamed and incensed
Wagner felt when his eyes were openedflto the kind of 'artifices' the
artist was virtually obliged to employ ifhe was to wrest a success from
the public. I doubt whether there has been another great artist in all
history who started out so greatly in error and who engaged in the
most revolting form of his art with such goodwill and naivety: and
yet the way in which he did it had greatness in it and was therefore
extraordinarily fruitful. For out of the despair he felt when he came
to recognize his error he also came to comprehend the nature of
modern success, of the modern public and of the whole of modern
artistic falsity. By becoming a critic of , effect' he produced in himself
the first trembling awareness of how he himself might be purified. It
was as though from then on the spirit of music spoke to him with a
wholly novel psychical magic. As if he were returning to life after a
long illness, he hardly trusted his eyes or his hands, he crept along
groping; and thus it appeared to him a miraculous discovery when
he found he was still a musician, still an artist, indeed that it was only
now that he had become a musician and artist at all.
Every further stage in Wagner's evolution is characterized by a
closer and closer union between his two fundamental drives: their
wariness of one another diminishes, and hereafter his higher self no
longer condescends to serve its violent, more earthly brother, it loves
it and cannot but serve it. Finally, when the goal of this evolution has
been reached, the most tender and pure elements are contained
within the most powerful, the impetuous drive goes its way as before
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
but along a different path to where the higher self is at home; and
conversely, the latter descends to earth and in everything earthly
recognizes its own image. If it were possible to speak in this fashion
of the ultimate goal and issue of this evolution and still remain
intelligible, then it would also be possible to discover the ineta­
physical expression which would describe a lengthy, intermediate
stage in this evolution; but I doubt if the former can be done, and I
shall therefore not attempt the latter either. This intermediate stage
can be distinguished historically from the earlier and later stages
with two phrases: Wagner becomes a social revolutionary, Wagner
recognizes that the only artist there has been hitherto is the poetizing
folk. * He was led to both by the ruling idea which, after that period of
great despair and atonement, appeared before him in a new shape
and more powerfully than ever. Influence, incomparable influence
by means of the theatre! - but over whom? He shuddered when he
recalled those whom he had hitherto sought to influence. From his
own experience he knew the whole shameful situation in which art
and artists find themselves: how a soulless or soul-hardened society,
which calls itself good but is in fact evil, counts art and artists as
among its retinue of slaves whose task it is to satisfy its imagined needs.
Modern art is luxury: he grasped that fact, as he did the fact that it
must stand or fall with the society to which it belongs. Just as it has
employed its power over the powerless, over the folk, in the most
hardhearted and cunning fashion so as to render them ever more
serviceable, base and less natural, and to create out of them the mod­
ern 'worker', so it has deprived the folk of the greatest and purest
things its profoundest needs moved it to produce and in which, as
the true and only artist, it tenderly expressed its sou'! - its mythology,
its song, its dance, its linguistic inventiveness - in order to distil from
them a lascivious antidote to the exhaustion and boredom of its
existence, the arts of today. How this society came into being, how it
knew how to imbibe new strength from apparently antagonistic
spheres of power, how for example Christianity degenerated to
hypocrisy and superficiality and allowed itself to be used as a shield
against the folk, as a fortress for this society and its property, and
how science and scholarship offered themselves only too pliably to
* Paraphrasing Wagner, here and elsewhere in this essay, Nietzsche uses the word
Volk in the sense in which Wagner used it, i.e. the 'people' or the 'nation' as a cultural,
as opposed to political, entity. This sense of Volk has an English analogue in the
phrases 'folk-story' and 'folk-music'; and, although the word by itselfis now archaic in
English, there seems to be no alternative to using it here.
r
i
\
I
! -,
, I
, I
!-l n
this forced service - all this Wagner pursued through the ages, only
to spring up in rage and disgust when he had finished: he had
become a revolutionary out of pity for the folk. From then on he
loved the folk and yearned for them as he yearned after his art, for
ah! it was only in them, only in the folk, though it was now artificially
suppressed so that it could hardly any longer be imagined, that he
now saw the only spectator and listener who might be worthy of and
equal to the power of his art-work as he dreamed of it. Thus his
reflections collected around the question: how does the folk come
into being? how can it be resurrected?
He found only one answer: - if a multiplicity of people suffered
the same need as he suffered, that would be the folk, he said to him­
self. And where the same need led to the same impulse and desire,
the same kind of satisfaction must necessarily be sought and the
same happiness discovered in this satisfaction. When he then cast
around for that which cheered and consoled him the most in his
need, which came to meet it most warmly and profoundly, he was
aware with inspiriting certainty that it coqJd only be the myth and
music - the myth which he recognized as the product and language
of the folk's need, music having a similar though even more
enigmatic origin. In these two elements he bathed and healed his
soul, they were what he desired most ardently: - from this condition
he could infer how closely related his need was to that experienced
by the folk when it came into being, and in what manner the folk
would have to be resurrected if there were to be many Wagners. How,
then, did myth and music fare in our modern society, insofar as they
had not fallen victim to it? They had both suffered a similar fate, a
witness to their mysterious affinity: myth had been deeply debased
and disfigured, transformed into the 'fairy tale', the plaything of the
women and children of the degenerate folk and quite divested of its
miraculous and serious manly nature; music had maintained itself
among the poor and simple, among the solitary, the German mu­
sician had failed to establish himself in the luxury trade in the arts
and had himself become a fairy tale full of monsters and touching
sounds and signs, an asker of the wrong questions, something quite
enchanted and in need of redemption. Here the artist heard clearly
the command directed at him alone - to restore to the myth its
manliness, and to take the spell from music and bring it to speech: all
at once he felt his strength for drama unfettered, his right to rule over
an as yet undiscovered middle realm between myth and music
, established. He now set before mankind his new art-work, within
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
which he had enclosed all he knew of power, effectiveness and joy,
with the great, painfully incisive question: 'Where are you who suffer
and desire as I do? Where are the many which I long to see become a
folk? The sign by which I shall know you is that you shall have the
same happiness and the same comfort in common with me: your
suffering shall be revealed to me through your joy!' Thus he ques-"
tioned in Tannhiiuser and Lohengrin, thus he looked about him for his
own kind; the solitary thirsted for the many.
Yet what happened? No one answered, no one understood the
question. Not that there was utter silence; on the contrary, there
were answers to a thousand questions he had never asked at all, there
were twitterings about the new art-works as though they had been
created for the express purpose of being talked to pieces. The whole
lust for aesthetic chattering and scribbling erupted among the Germans
like a fever, the art-works and the person of the artist were assessed
and fingered with that shamelessness which characterizes German
scholars no less than it does German journalists. Wagner tried to
assist an understanding of his question through prose writings: fresh
confusion, fresh buzzing - a musician who writes and thinks was to
all the world in those days a monstrosity; then they cried: he is a
theorist who wants to transform art according to intellectual con­
cepts, stone him! - Wagner was as though stunned; his question had
not been understood, his need not comprehended, his art-works
were like communications to the deaf and blind, his folk was like a
phantom; he reeled and faltered. The possibility of a total upheaval
of all things rose before his eyes, and he no longer shrank from this
possibility: perhaps a new hope could be erected on the other side of
revolution and destruction, perhaps not - and in any event nothing­
ness is better than something repulsive. Before long he was a political
refugee and penniless.
Yet it was only now, when his outward and inner destiny had taken
so fearful a turn, that the great man entered upon the period of his
life over which the light of supreme mastery lies like the glitter of
liquid gold! Only now did the genius of the dithyrambic drama
throw off his last concealment! He is utterly alone, time seems no­
thing to him, he has abandoned hope: thus his universal glance
again descends into the depths, and this time to the very bottom:
there he sees that suffering pertains to the essence of things and from
then on, grown as it were more impersonal, he accepts his own share
of suffering more calmly. The desire for supreme power, the
inheritance of earlier years, is wholly translated into artistic
23 1
i
I
I
creativity; now he speaks through his art only to himself and no longer
to a 'public' or folk, and struggles to bestow upon it the greatest
clarity and capacity to conduct such a mighty colloquy. His works
too had been different during the preceding period: in them too he
had, if nobly and tenderly, sought to produce an immediate effect:
for these works were meant as a question designed to evoke an in­
stant answer; and how often Wagner desired to make himself more
easily understood by those to whom he put it - so that he went out to
meet them and their inexperience in being questioned and con­
formed to older forms and means of expression; where he had to
fear that he would fail to convince and be understood in his own
language, he had tried to put his question in a tongue half foreign to
him, though familiar to his listeners. Now there was no longer any­
thing to constrain him to such consideration; now he wanted only
one thing: to come to terms with himself, to think of the nature of the
world in the form of actions, to philosophize in sound; what was left
in him of intentionality was bent upon the expression of his final
insights. He who is worthy to know what teo k place in him then, what
he was accustomed to discuss with himself in the darkest sanctuary
of his soul - not many are worthy of it - let him hear, behold and
experience Tristan und Isolde, the actual opus metaphysicum of all art, a
work upon which there lies the broken glance of a dying man with
his insatiable sweet longing for the mysteries of night and death, far
distant from life, which, as evil, deception and separation, shines
with an uncanny ghostly morning brightness and distinctness: and
with this a drama of the most austere strictness of form, ovelWhelming
in its simple grandeur, and only thus adequate to the mystery of
which it speaks, the mystery of death in life, of unity in duality. And
yet there is something even more miraculous than this work: the
artist himself, who after producing it could soon afterwards create a
world of a completely different colouring, the Meistersinger von
Niirnberg, and who was indeed, in these two works, only as it were
resting and refreshing himself so as then to complete with measured
pace the four-part giant structure he had already sketched out and
begun, the object of his reflection and invention over twenty years,
his Bayreuth art-work, the Ring des Nibelungen! Whoever can feel per­
plexed at the proximity of Tristan and the Meistersinger has failed to
understand the life and nature of all truly great Germans on an
important point: he does not know upon what basis alone that uniquely
German cheerfulness exhibited by Luther, Beethoven and Wagner can
grow, a kind of cheerfulness which other nations completely fail to
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
understand and which contemporary Germans themselves Ɠppear
to have lost - that golden, thoroughly fermented mixture of sim­
plicity, the penetrating glance of love, reflective mind and roguish­
ness such as Wagner has dispensed as the most delicious of draughts
to all who have suffered profoundly from life and return to it as it
were with the smile of convalescents. And, as he himself looked
upon the world with more reconciled eyes, was seized less often with
rage and disgust, renounced power more in sorrow and love than
with a shudder, as he thus quietly pushed forward his greatest work
and laid score beside score, something happened which made him
stop and listen: friends were coming to tell him of a subterranean
movement of many souls - it was far from being the 'folk' that was
here in motion and announcing itself, but perhaps the germ and first
source oflife of a truly human community to be perfected in the dis­
tant future; for the present no more than a guarantee that his great
work could one day be placed in the hands and care of faithful men
charged with and worthy of guarding this most glorious oflegacies in
the years to come; in the love of friends the days of his life began to
shine in warmer colours; his noblest care and concern, as it were to
reach the goal of his work before evening and to find for it a shelter,
was no longer his care and concern alone. And then there occurred
an event which he could understand only symbolically and which
signified for him a new comfort, a sign of good fortune. A great German
war made him look up, a war of those same Germans whom he knew
to have degenerated and fallen so far from the German highminded­
ness which he had come to know from his observation of himself
and of the other great Germans of history
he saw that, in a quite
tremendous situation, these Germans had exhibited two genuine
virtues, simple bravery and presence of mind, and he began to think
that perhaps he was not the last German and that one day his work
would secure the protection of a more formidable power than that of
his self-sacrificing but few friends, which would preserve it for that
future destined to it as the art-work of the future. Perhaps, when he
sought to advance this belief to a hope of immediate realization, it
was not always possible to shield it from doubt: it is enough that it
gave to him a tremendous incitement to remember a lofty duty
as yet unfulfilled.
His work would not have been finished, not brought to a con­
clusion, if he had entrusted it to posterity only as a mute score; he
had publicly to demonstrate and give instruction in what could not
be guessed, in what he alone knew, of the new style needed for its
I
I
I
performance and representation, so as to provide a model no other
could provide and thus found a stylistic tradition inscribed, not in
signs on paper, but in effects upon the souls of men. This had
become all the more serious a duty inasmuch as his other works had
meanwhile suffered the most intolerable and absurd fate precisely in
regard to the style of their performance: they were famous, admired
and - mishandled without anyone's apparently being indignant over
the fact. For, strange though it may sound, as in clearsighted
knowledge of what his contemporaries were like he abandoned ever
more earnestly the desire for success with them and renounced the
idea of power, 'success' and 'power' came to him; at least all the
world told him so. It was no good for him to expose repeatedly and
emphatically how such 'successes' were complete misunderstand­
ings and, to him, humiliations; people were so unused to seeing an
artist distinguish between the differing effects produced by his works
that even his most solemn protests were never really taken seriously.
After he had realized the connection between our theatrical world
and theatrical success and the character tof contemporary man, his
soul ceased to have anything to do with this theatre; he was no longer
concerned with aesthetic enthusiasms or the jubilation of excited
masses, indeed he was filled with wrath to see his art fed so indis­
criminately into the gaping maw of insatiable boredom and thirst for
distraction. Just how superficial and thoughtless every effect pro­
duced here must be, how here it was a matter rather of cramming a
stomach never satisfied than of feeding a hungry one, he concluded
especially from one regularly recurring phenomenon: everywhere,
even on the part of the performers and producers, his art was taken
to be precisely the same kind of thing as any other music for the stage
and subjected to the rules of the repulsive recipe-book of ordinary
opera production; indeed, the cultivated conductors cut and hacked
at his works until they really were operas which, now they had had
the soul taken out of them, the singers felt capable of encompassing;
and when attempts were made to perform them properly, Wagner's
directions were followed with the sort of ineptitude and prudish
anxiety that would, for instance, represent the nocturnal riot in the
streets of Nuremberg prescribed for the second act of the Meister­
singer with a troop of posturing ballet dancers
and in all this
everyone appeared to be acting in good faith and without any ma­
licious intent. Wagner's self-sacrificing attempts to indicate by deed
and example at any rate simple correctness and completeness in the
performance of his works, and to introduce individual singers to his
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
quite novel style of execution, were repeatedly swept away by the
sludge of prevailing thoughtlessness and habit; and these effects,
moreover, always involved him in mixing with a theatre whose
whole being had become for him an object of. disgust. Did not
Goethe himself lose the desire to attend performances of his own
Iphigenie: 'I suffer dreadfully', he said in explanation, 'when I have to
associate with these phantoms, who never appear as they ought to
do.' Meanwhile his 'success' at this theatre grown repulsive to him
continued to increase; finally the point was reached at which the
great theatres lived for the most part on the fat takings brought them
by the Wagnerian art-works disguised as operas. The confusion
involved in this growing passion on the part of the opera public even
seized hold on many of Wagner's friends: though he had suffered
much in patience, he now had to suffer the worst and see his friends
intoxicated by 'successes' and 'victories' precisely where his
uniquely lofty idea was denied and derided. It almost seemed as
though a people in many respects serious and ponderous was refusing
to be deprived of a systematic levity in regard to its most serious
artist, as though this were why everything vulgar, thoughtless, inept
and malicious in the German character had to be discharged at him.
- When, therefore, during the German War a more expansive and
freer current of feeling seemed to come uppermost, Wagner remem­
bered the duty imposed upon him by his loyalty to rescue at any rate
his greatest work from the success born of misunderstanding and
the abuse to which his other words had been subjected, and to pre­
sent it at its own unique tempo as an example for all future time: thus
he conceived the idea of Bayreuth. In the wake of that current of feeling
he believed he saw an enhanced feeling of duty also awaken in those
to whom he wished to entrust his most precious possession - and it
was out of this feeling of mutual duty that there grew the event which
lies like strange sunlight upon recent and immediately coming years;
designed for the benefit of a distant future, a future that is merely
possible but not demonstrable, a future that is to the present and
to men knowing only the present not much more than an enigma
or an abomination, to those few permitted to assist in its creation
a foretaste and fore-experience of the highest kind through which
they know themselves blessed, blessing and fruitful beyond their
span of time, to Wagner himself a darkness of toil, care, reflec­
tion, wrath, a renewed raging of the h ostile elements, but above
all the light of the star of selfless loyalty and in this light trans­
formed into an unspeakable happiness!
One hardly needs to say that the breath of the tragic lies over this
life. And everyone who can sense something of it from out of his own
soul, everyone to whom the constraint of a tragic deception as to the
goal of life, the bending and breaking of intentions, renunciation
and purification through love are things not wholly unknown, must
feel in that which Wagner now exhibits as an art-work a dreamlike
recollection of the great man's own heroic existence. From some far
distance we shall believe we hear Siegfried telling of his deeds: into
the touching happiness of recollection there is weaved the profound
sadness of late summer, and all nature lies still in a yellow evening
light. -
To reflect on what Wagner the artist is, and to meditate on the spectacle
of a truly liberated artistic capacity and autocracy, is something that
everyone who has thought about and suffered from Iww Wagner the
man evolved will have need of as a means of recovery and refreshment.
If art in general is only the ability to comm1tnicate to others what one
has experienced, if every art-work contradicts itself if it cannot make
itself understood, then Wagner's greatness as an artist must consist
in precisely that demonic communicability of his nature, which as it
were speaks of itself in every language and makes known its inner,
most personal experience with the extremest clarity; his appearance
in the history of the arts is like a volcanic eruption of the total
undivided artistic capacity of nature itself after humanity had accus­
tomed itself to seeing the arts isolated from one another as though
this were an eternal rule. One can thus be undecided which name to
accord him, whether he should be called a poet or a sculptor or a
musician, each word taken in an extraordinarily wide sense, or
whether a new word has to be created to describe him.
Thepoetic element in Wagner is disclosed by the fact that he thinks in
visible and palpable events, not in concepts; that is to say, he thinks
mythically, as the folk has always thought. The myth is not founded
on a thought, as the children of an artificial culture believe, it is itself
a mode of thinking; it communicates an idea of the world, but as a
succession of events, actions and sufferings. Der Ring des Nibeluf!gen is
a tremendous system of thought without the conceptual form of
thought. Perhaps a philosopher could set beside it something exactly
corresponding to it but lacking in image or action and speaking to us
merely in concepts: one would then have presented the same thing
in two disparate spheres, once for the folk and once for the antithesis
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
of the folk, the theoretical man. Thus Wagner does not address him­
self to the latter; for the theoretical man understands of the poetical,
of the myth, precisely as much as a deaf man does of music, that is to
say both behold a movement which seems to them meaningless.
From within one of these disparate spheres one cannot see into the
other: so long as one is under the spell of the poet one thinks with
him, as though one were a being who only feels, sees and hears; the
conclusions one draws are the linking together of the events one
sees, that is to say factual causalities, not logical ones.
N ow, if the gods and heroes of such mythological dramas as
Wagner writes are to communicate also in words, there is no greater
danger than that this spoken language will awaken the theoretical man
in us and thereby heave us over into the other, non-mythical sphere:
so that in the end we should not through the employment of words
have understood more clearly what is taking place before us but, on
the contrary, have failed to understand it at all. That is why Wagner
has forced language back to a primordial state in which it hardly yet
thinks in concepts and in which it is itself still poetry, image and feeling;
the fearlessness with which Wagner set about this quite frightful task
shows how forcibly he was led by the spirit of poetry, as one who has
to follow wherever his ghostly guide may lead him. Every word of
these dramas had to be able to be sung, and it had to be appropriate
to gods and heroes: that was the tremendous demand Wagner pre­
sented to his linguistic imagination. Anyone else would surely have
despaired of succeeding; for our language seems almost too old and
too devastated for one to be able to demand of it what Wagner
demanded: and yet the blow he struck against the rock called forth
an abundant spring. Because he had loved this language more and
demanded more ofit than other Germans, Wagner had also suffered
more from its degeneration and enfeeblement, from the manifold
losses and mutilation it had sustained, from its clumsy sentence
structure, from its unsingable auxiliary verbs - all things which have
entered into the language through sin and depravity. On the other
hand, he sensed with profound pride the natural originality and
inexhaustibility still existing in this language, the resonant strength
of its roots in which he suspected, in contrast to the highly derivative
and artificially rhetorical languages of the Roman family, a wonder­
ful inclination to and preparation for music, for true music. A joy in
German permeates Wagner's poetry, a cordiality and ingenuousness
in dealing with it that is to be encountered in no other German
except Goethe. Individuality of expression, bold compression,
forcefulness and rhythmic versatility, a remarkable richness in
strong and significant words, simplification of sentence construc­
tion, an almost unique inventiveness in the language of surging feeling
and presentiment, occasionally a quite pure bubbling up of popular
colloquialisms and proverbiality - these are among the qualities that
would have to be listed, and yet the mightiest and most admirable
would still have been forgotten. Whoever reads, one after the other,
two such poems as Tristan and the Meistersinger will feel a sense of
amazement and perplexity in respect of the verbal language similar
to that which he feels in respect of the music: namely, how it could
have been possible to create two worlds as disparate in form, colour
and articulation as they are in soul. This is the mightiest of Wagner's
gifts, something that only a great master can succeed in: the ability to
mint for every work a language of its own and to bestow upon a new
subjectivity also a new body and a new sound. Where this rarest of
powers expresses itself, censure of individual excesses and singularities,
or of the more frequent obscurities of expression and thought, will
always be no more than petty and unfrl.&itful. Moreover, those who
have hitherto censured most loudly have at bottom found not so
much the language as the soul, the whole way of feeling and suffering,
repellent and unheard-of. Let us wait until they themselves have
acquired a new soul, then they themselves will also speak a new
language: and then, it seems to me, the German language as a whole
will be in better shape than it is now.
Before all, however, no one who reflects on Wagner as poet and
sculptor of language should forget that none of the Wagnerian
dramas is intended to be read, and thus they must not be impor­
tuned with the demands presented to the spoken drama. The latter
wants to influence the feelings solely through concepts and words;
this oŕjective brings it beneath the sway of rhetoric. But in life passion
is rarely loquacious: in the spoken drama it has to be if it is to com­
municate itself at all. When the language of a people is already in a
state of decay and detrition, however, the poet of the spoken drama
is tempted to give his thoughts and language unusual colours and to
invent neologisms; he wants to elevate language so that it can again
express exalted feelings and he thereby incurs the danger of not
being understood at alL He likewise seeks to communicate some­
thing of nobility to the passions through witty aphorisms and con­
ceits and thereby falls into another kind of danger: he appears false
and artificial. For real passion does not speak in maxims, and the
poetic easily arouses distrust of its honesty if it differs essentially
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
from this reality. Wagner, on the other hand, as the first to recognize
the inner deficiencies of the spoken drama, presents every dramatic
event in a threefold rendering, through words, gestures and music:
the music transmits the fundamental impulses in the depths of the
persons represented in the drama directly to the soul of the listeners,
who now perceive in these same persons' gestures the first visible
form of those inner events, and in the words a second, paler manifes­
tation of them translated into a more conscious act of will. All these
effects take place simultaneously without in the least interfering with
one another, and compel him before whom such a drama is presented
to a quite novel understanding and empathy, just as though his senses
had all at once grown more spiritual and his spirit more sensual, and
as though everything that longs to know is now in a free and blissful
transport of knowing. Because every event in a Wagnerian drama,
illumined from within as it is by music, communicates itself to the
spectator with the utmost clarity., its author was able to dispense with
all those means of which the poet of the spoken drama has need ifhe
is to give the events of his play warmth and luminosity. The whole
economy of the drama could be made simpler, the architect's
rhythmic sense could again venture to reveal itself in the great
overall proportions of the building; for there was now no motive
whatever for that deliberate complexity and confusing multiplicity
through which the poet of the spoken drama seeks to arouse interest
and tension and then enhance them to a feeling of happy astonish­
ment. The impression of idealized remoteness and nobility could
now be achieved without artifice. Language retreated from rhetorical
expansiveness to the economy and force of a speech of feeling: and
although the performer talked about his deeds and feelings far less
than before, the inward events which the poet of the spoken drama
had hitherto kept off the stage on account of their supposedly
undramatic nature now compelled the listener to a passionate
empathy with them, while the gestures which attended them needed
to be only of the gentlest. Now, passion sung takes somewhat longer
than passion spoken; music stretches feeling, as it were: from which
it follows that in general the performer who is also a singer has to
overcome that agitation of movement from which the spoken drama
suffers. He finds himself drawn towards an ennoblement of his ges­
tures, and he does so all the more in that the music has plunged his
feelings into the bath of a purer aether and has thus involuntarily
made them more beautiful.
The extraordinary tasks Wagner has set his actors and singers will
for generations to come incite them to competition with one
another, so as at last to achieve a perfect visible and palpable rep­
resentation of the image of the Wagnerian hero which already lies
perfectly realized in the music of the drama. Following this lead, the
eye of the plastic artist will at last behold the miracle of a new visible
world such as only the creator of such works as the Ring des Nibelungen
has seen before him: as a sculptor of the highest kind who, like
Aeschylus, points the way to an art of the future. Indeed, must not
the jealousy aroused when the plastic artist compares the effect of his
art with that of such music as Wagner's not in itself inspire great
talents: a music in which there reposes the purest sunlit happiness;
so that to him who hears this music it is as though almost all earlier
music had spoken in a superficial and constricted language, as
though it were a game played before those unworthy of seriousness
or a means of instruction and demonstration for those unworthy
even of play. That earlier music inspires in us only for brief hours
that happiness which we feel in Wagnerian music all the time: rare
moments of forgetfulness when it spea;.s to itself alone and, like
Raphael's Cecilia, directs its glance away from its listeners, who
demand of it only distraction, merriment or scholarliness.
Of Wagner the musician it can be said in general that he has be­
stowed a language upon everything in nature which has hitherto not
wanted to speak: he does not believe that anything is obliged to be
dumb. He plunges into daybreaks, woods, mist, ravines, mountain
heights, the dread of night, moonlight, and remarks in them a secret
desire: they want to resound. If the philosopher says it is one will
which in animate and inanimate nature thirsts for existence, the
musician adds: and this will wants at every stage an existence in
sound.
Before Wagner, music was as a whole narrowly bounded; it
applied to the steady, permanent states of mankind, to that which
the Greeks called ethos, and it was only with Beethoven that it began
to discover the language of pathos, of passionate desire, of the
dramatic events which take place in the depths of man. Formerly the
objective was to give expression in sound to a mood, a state of deter­
mination or cheerfulness or reverence or penitence; by means of a
certain striking uniformity of form, and through protracting this
uniformity for some time, one wanted to compel the listener to
interpret the mood of the music and in the end to be transported
into it himself. Different forms were needed for each of these images
of different moods and states; other forms were determined by con-
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
vention. The question oflength was a matter for the judgment of the
composer, who, while wanting to transport the listener into a certain
mood, did not want to bore him by going on for too long. A further
step was taken when images of antithetical moods were placed one
after the other and the charm of contrast was discovered, and a
further step still when a single musical movement took into itself an
antithetical ethos, for example by allowing a masculine theme to
come into conflict with a feminine theme. All these are still rude and
primitive stages of music. The first law originated in fear of passion,
the second in fear of boredom; all deepening and excess of feeling
was felt to be 'unethical'. But when the art of ethos had presented the
same customary states and moods in hundredfold repetition it
finally succumbed to exhaustion, notwithstanding the marvellous
inventiveness of its masters. Beethoven was the first to let music
speak a new language, the hitherto forbidden language of passion:
but because his art had grown out of the laws and conventions of the
art of ethos, and had as it were to try to justify itself before them, his
artistic development was peculiarly difficult and bes(t with con­
fusions. An inner dramatic event- for every passion takes a dramatic
course - wanted to break through to a new form, but the traditional
scheme of the music of moods set itself in opposition and spoke
against it almost as morality speaks against the rise of immorality. It
sometimes seems as . though Beethoven had set himself the con­
tradictory task of expressing pathos through the forms of ethos. This
idea is, however, inadequate to his last and greatest works. To re­
produce the great vaulting arch of a passion he really did discover a
new means: he removed individual portions of its flightpath and
illuminated these with the greatest distinctness, so that from them
the listener would divine the entire curve. Viewed superficially, the
new form seemed like several musical movements put together,
each of them apparently representing a single enduring state, in
reality however a moment in the dramatic course of the passion. It
could happen that the listener would think he was hearing the old
music of mood but failing to grasp the relationship of the several
parts to one another, which could no longer be understood by
reference to the old canon of antithetical parts. Even among com­
posers there arose a contempt for the demand for the construction
of an artistic whole, and the sequence of the parts of their works
became arbitrary. The invention of the grand form for the ex­
pression of passion led via a misunderstanding back to the single
movement with whatever content the composer might choose, and
24 1
tension between different parts of a work ceased altogether. That is
why the symphony after Beethoven is such a strangely confused
structure, especially when in its individual parts it still stammers the
language of Beethoven ian pathos. The means are not appropriate to
the objective, and the objective as a whole is not at all clear to the
listener because it was never clear to the composer either. But the
demand that one should have something quite definite to say, and
that one should say it as clearly as possible, is the more indispensable
the higher, more difficult and more ambitious a species of work
is.
That is why Wagner's whole struggle was to find every means of
procuring clarity; to this end he needed above all to liberate himself
from every prejudice and claim of the older music of static states and
to put into the mouth of his music, which may be called the oper­
ations of feeling and passion become sound, a speech free of all
ambiguity. If we look at what he achieved, it must seem to us as
though he has done in the realm of music what the inventor of free­
standing sculpture did in that of the plaȇic arts. Measured against
Wagner's, all earlier music seems stiff or timid, as though it were
ashamed to be seen from all sides. Wagner seizes every degree and
every shade of feeling with the greatest sureness and definiteness: he
takes the tenderest, most remote and wildest emotions in hand
without fear oflosing his grip on them and holds them as something
hard and firm, even though to anyone else they may be as elusive as a
butterfly. His music is never indefinite, indicating only a general
mood; everything that speaks through it, man or nature, has a strictly
. individualized passion; storm and fire take on the compelling force
of a personal will. Over all the individuals realized in sound and the
struggles their passions undergo, over the whole vortex of opposing
forces, there soars in the supremest self-possession an oveIWhelming
symphonic intelligence which out of all this conflict brings forth
concord: Wagner's music as a whole is an image of the world as it was
understood by the great Ephesian philosopher: * a harmony pro­
duced by conflict, the unity of justice and enmity. I wonder at the
fact that it is possible to calculate the grand course of a total passion
out of a multiplicity of individual passions each heading in a dif­
ferent direction: that such a thing is possible I see demonstrated by
each individual act of a Wagnerian drama, which narrates the per­
sonal history of various individuals together with a general history of
*Heraclitus (sixth cemury BC).
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
all of them. At the very beginning we sense that we have before us
individtial conflicting currents but at the same time a stream with a
powerful directionality which is master of them all: this stream
moves restlessly at first, over hidden jagged rocks, the flood some­
times seems to divide as though it wanted to go in different direc­
tions. Gradually we notice that the inner general movement has
become more powerful, more compelling; the convulsive restless­
ness has passed over into a broad, fearfully strong movement
towards an as yet unknown goal; and suddenly the whole breadth of
the stream ends by plunging down into the depths with a demonic
joy in the abyss and in its seething waves. Wagner is never more
Wagner than when difficulties multiply tenfold and he can rule over
great affairs with the joy of a lawgiver. To subdue contending masses
to a simple rhythm, to subject a multiplicity of demands and desires
to the rule of a single will - these are the tasks for which he feels he
was born, in the performance of which he feels himself free. He
never loses his breath in the process, he never arrives at his goal
panting. He has striven as ceaselessly to impose the harshest laws
upon himself as others strive to lighten their burden; he is oppressed
by life and art when he cannot play with their most difficult prob­
lems. Consider, for instance, the relation between sung melody and
the melody of unsung speech, and how Wagner treats the pitch,
volume and tempo of passionate human speech as a natural model
which it is his task to transform into art: - consider how this sung
passion is then ordered within the total symphonic complex of the
music and recognize a miracle of difficulties overcome: his inven­
tiveness here, in great things .and small, the omnipresence of his
spirit and his diligence, is such that at the sight of a Wagnerian score
one could believe that before him there was no such thing as labour
and exertion. It seems that, in regard to the toil involved in art too,
he could have said that the actual virtue of the dramatist consists in
self-sacrifice; but he would probably retort: there is only one kind of
toil, that of him who has not yet become free; virtue and goodness
are easy.
Taken as a whole, Wagner as an artist has about him something of
Demosthenes: a tremendous seriousness as to his subject combined
with a strength of grip that seizes it every time without fail; he lays
hold of it in a moment and his hand clings fast as though it were of
brass. Like Demosthenes, he conceals his art or makes his audience
forget it by compelling them to concentrate on the subject; and yet,
again like Demosthenes, he is the last and highest exemplar of a
11'1 '
;
whole series of artistic spirits and consequently has more to conceal
than the first in the series had; his art, as nature reproduced and
rediscovered, has the effect of nature. He has nothing epideictic
about him, as have all earlier composers who occasionally played a
game with their art and put their mastery on display. At a perform­
ance of a Wagnerian art-work one is not aware of what is interesting
or enjoyable, or of Wagner himself, or of art at all: one feels only the
necessity ofit all. What severity and uniformity of purpose he imposed
upon his will, what self-overcoming the artist had need of in the
years of his development so as at last in his maturity to do with joyful
freedom what was necessary at every moment of creation, no one
will ever be able to calculate: it is enough if we sense in individual
cases how, with a certain cruelty of decision, his music subordinates
itself to the course of the drama, which is as inexorable as fate, while
the fiery soul of this art thirsts to roam about for once unchecked in
the freedom of the wilderness.
1 0
An artist who possesses this power over himself subjugates all other
artists even without wanting to do so. To him alone, on the other
hand, do those he subjects, his friends and adherents, represent no
danger or limitation: whereas lesser characters who seek support
from their friends generally lose their freedom through them. It is
wonderful to see how his whole life long Wagner has avoided any
kind of party, but how nonetheless a circle of adherents has formed
itselfbehind every phase in the development of his art, apparently in
order to keep him fixed at that phase. He was always able to frustrate
this intention and to pass through to the next phase; his path has
been too long, moreover, for any other individual to have found it
easy to accompany him the whole way and so unusual and steep that
even the most loyal would find themselves out of breath. At almost
every stage of Wagner's life his friends would have liked to have laid
down the law to him; and so, for different reasons, would his
enemies. If the purity of his artistic character had been only a degree
less firm he could have become the uncontested master of contem­
porary art and music a great deal sooner: - which is what he has
finally become, though in the much higher sense that everything
that takes place in any domain of art sees itself involuntarily set
before the judgment seat of his art and his artistic character. He has
subdued even the most reluctant: there is no longer any musician of
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
talent who does not inwardly listen to him and find him more worth
listening to than his own and all other music together. Some, deter­
mined to mean something at all cost, wrestle with this overwhelming
inner influence, exile themselves to the circle of the older masters
and prefer to found their 'independence' on Schubert -or Handel
rather than on Wagner. In vain! By struggling against their better
conscience, they themselves grow meaner and pettier as artists, they
ruin their character by having to endure base friends and allies: and
after all these sacrifices they still find themselves, perhaps in a
dream, giving ear to Wagner. These opponents are pitiable: they
believe they have lost a great deal when they lose themselves, but
they are here in error.
Now, it is plain that Wagner is not very much concerned whether
composers from now on compose in a Wagnerian manner or
whether they compose at all; indeed, he does what he can to destroy
the unfortunate current belief that a school of composers must now
necessarily attach itself to him. Insofar as he exercises a direct
influence on present-day musicians he tries to instruct them in the
an of grand execution; it seems to him that the evolution of the an
has reached a point at which the will to become an efficient master of
performance and practical musicianship is far more estimable than
the thirst to be 'creative' at any cost. For, at the stage the an has now
reached, such creativity, by multiplying and then wearing out
through everyday use the techniques and inventions of genius, has
the fatal consequence of trivializing the effect of what is truly great.
In an, even the good is superfluous and harmful when it originates
in imitation of the best. Wagnerian means and ends belong together:
to feel the truth of this requires nothing more than anistic honesty,
and it is dishonesty to observe the means and then employ them for
quite different, pettier ends.
If Wagner thus declines to live among a crowd of composers all
composing away in the Wagnerian manner, he is all the more insistent
in setting every talent the new task of discovering together with him
the stylistic laws of dramatic performance. He feels a profound need to
found for his art a stylistic tradition by means of which his work could
live on unalloyed from one age to the next until it attains thatfuture
for which its creator has destined it.
'
Wagner possesses the insatiable urge to impart everything per­
taining to this foundation of a style and thereby to the continuing
existence of his an. To make his work, as a sacred deposit and true
fruit of his existence (to employ an expression of Schopenhauer's),
the property of mankind, to lay it down for a posterity better able to
judge it, has become to him a goal which takes precedence over all
other goals and for the sake of which he wears the crown of thorns
which shall one day blossom into a laurel-wreath: his efforts are con­
centrated on the safeguarding of his work just as decidedly as are
those of the insect in its final stage on safeguarding its eggs and on
caring for the brood whose existence it will never know: it deposits
the eggs where it knows for sure they will one day find life and
nourishment, and dies contented.
This goal, which takes precedence over all other goals, inspires
him to ever new inventions; the more clearly he feels himself in con­
flict with his most unresponsive age and its utter unwillingness to listen,
the more abundantly does he draw on the well of his demonic genius
for communication. Gradually, however, even this age begins to give
way before his unwearying promptings and enticements and lends
him its ear. Whenever an opportunity, great or small, of elucidating
his thoughts by practical example appeared in the distance, Wagner
was prepared for it: he applied his ideas to the prcumstances obtaining
and made them speak even out of the most inadequate embodi­
ments. Whenever an even halfway receptive soul appeared he cast
his seed into it. He attached his hopes to things at which the cold
observer shrugged his shoulders; he was willing to deceive himself a
hundred times if it meant being once in the right as against this
observer. As the wise man traffics with living men only so far as he
can thereby augment the treasury of his knowledge, so it almost
seems as though the artist can have no traffic with the men of his age
except that through which he can perpetuate his art: to love him
means to love his art and its perpetuation, and he likewise under­
stands only one kind of hatred directed at himself, that which seeks
to break down the bridges between his art and its future. The pupils
Wagner reared for himself, the individual musicians and performers
to whom he spoke a word or illustrated a gesture, the great and modest
orchestras he directed, the towns which saw him earnestly at work,
the princes and women who, half timidly, half with love, par­
ticipated in his plans, the various European countries of which he
was temporarily the judge and bad conscience: all gradually became
an echo of his idea, of his inexhaustible striving for a fruitfulness in
the future; if this echo often returned to him distorted and confused,
in the end it grew to the overwhelming chorus which the overwhelming
intensity of the message he cried to the world was bound finally to
evoke; and soon it will be impossible not to hear him or to mis-
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
understand him. Already this chorus is making the art-centres of
modern man tremble; whenever the breath of his spirit has wafted
into these gardens, everything withered and ready to fall there has
been shaken; and even more eloquent than this trembling is a
universal uncertainty: no one knows any longer where the influence
of Wagner may not suddenly break out. He is quite incapable of
regarding the welfare of art as being in any way divorced from the
general welfare: wherever the modern spirit represents a danger of
any kind, there with the most observant mistrust he also suspects a
danger to art. I n  his imagination he takes apart the building of our
civilization and lets nothing decayed, nothing frivolously constructed,
escape; if he encounters firm walls or durable foundations, he at
once thinks of a way of employing them as bulwarks and protective
roofs for his art. He lives like a fugitive whose aim is to preserve, not
himself, but a secret; like an unfortunate woman who wants to save
the life of the child she carries in her womb, not her own: he lives like
Sieglinde, 'for the sake of love' . *
For it is, to be sure, a life full of torment and shame, to be a home­
less wanderer in a world to which one nonetheless has to speak and
of which one has to make demands, which one despises and yet is
unable to do without - it is the actual predicament of the artist of the
future; he cannot, like the philosopher, hunt after knowledge all by
himself in a dark corner, for he needs human souls as mediators with
the future, public institutions as guarantees of this future, as bridges
between the now and the hereafter. His art is not to be embarked on
the ship of the written word, as the philosopher's work can be: art
wants peifonners as transmitters, not letters and notes. Across whole
stretches of Wagner's life there resounds a fear that he will not meet
these performers and that, instead of the practical example he ought
to give them, he will be forced to confine himself to indications in
writing, and instead of active demonstration present the merest
shadow of it to those who read books, which means on the whole
those who are not artists.
Wagner as a writer is like a brave man whose right hand has been
cut off and who fights on with his left: he always suffers when he
writes, because a temporarily ineluctable necessity has robbed him
I of the ability to communicate in the way appropriate to him, in the
* In Die Walkure, Sieglinde, the mother of Siegfried, is urged by Briinnhilde to 'live
for the sake of love' by saving herself from the wrath of Wotan, not for her own sake,
but for that of the child she is carrying.
form of aluminous and victorious example. His writings contain
nothing canonical, nothing strict and severe: what is canonical is in
his works. They are attempts to comprehend the instinct which
impelled him to create his works, and as it were to set himself before
his own eyes; if he can only manage to transform his instinct into
knowledge, he hopes the reverse process will take place within the
souls of his readers: it is with this objective that he writes. If it should
in the event prove that he was here attempting the impossible,
Wagner would nonetheless only be sharing the same fate as all those
who have reflected on art; and over most of them he has the advan­
tage of being the repository of the mightiest instinct for all the arts
collectively. I know of no writings on aesthetics so illuminating as
Wagner's; what is to be learned about the birth of a work of art is to
be learned from them. It is one of the truly great artists who here
appears as a witness and through a long course of years deposes his
testimony ever more freely, clearly and distinctly; even when he
blunders in a point of knowledge he nonetheless strikes fire. Certain
of his writings, such as Beethoven, On Cond1Jcting, On Actors and Singers
and State and Religion, strike dumb every urge to contradiction and
compel one to regard them with the silent reverence appropriate to
the opening of a precious shrine. Others, especially those of earlier
years and including Opera and Drama, are disturbing: they evidence
an irregularity of rhythm through which they are, as prose, thrown
into disorder. Their argumentation is full of gaps, and their
emotional leaps hinder rather than accelerate their progress; a kind
of reluctance on the part of the writer lies over them like a shadow, as
. though the artist is ashamed of intellectual demonstration. The hardest
thing of all about them for those not wholly initiated is, perhaps, an
impression they give of dignified self-assertiveness; it is a tone
peculiar to them and one hard to describe: to me it seems as though
Wagner were often speaking in the presence of enemies - for all these writings
are in spoken, not in written style, and one will find them much
clearer if one hears them read well aloud
enemies with whom he
cannot be familiar or intimate and at whom he is thus compelled to
declaim from a distance. But sometimes his passionate engagement
breaks through this deliberate dignity of style, and then the artificial,
verbose and laboured periods vanish and there escape from him
sentences and whole pages which are among the most beautiful in all
German prose. Even supposing, however, that in such passages he is
speaking to his friends and that the spectre of his enemies has for the
moment vacated its place by his chair, all the friends and enemies
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
Wagner addresses as a writer nonetheless have something in com­
mon which distinguishes them fundamentally from that 'folk' for
whom he creates as an artist. In the refinement and unfruitfulness of
their culture they are altogether divorced from the world of the folk, and he
who wants to make himself understood by them has to -speak in a
manner divorced from that of the folk: as our best prose writers have
done and as Wagner also does. With what degree of self-constraint
we can guess. But the force of the drive, protective and as it were
motherly, which he brings to every sacrifice draws him back into the
atmosphere of the scholar and the cultivated to which as a creator he
has said farewell for ever. He subjects himself to the language of cul­
ture and to all its laws of communication, even though he was the
first to feel the profound inadequacy of this form of communi­
cation.
For if there is anything that sets his art apart from all other art of
modern times it is this: it no longer speaks the language of the cul­
ture of a caste and in general no longer recognizes any distinction
between the cultivated and the uncultivated. It therewith sets itself in
opposition to the entire culture of the Renaissance, which had pre­
viously enveloped us modern men in its light and shade. By
transporting us for moments out of this mantle of light and shade,
Wagner's art enables us for the first time to see how uniform that
whole period was: Goethe and Leopardi then appear to us as the last
great followers of the Italian philologist-poets, Faust as a represen­
tation of the riddle propounded by modern times of the theoretical
man who thirsts for real life - an enigma the furthest removed from
the world of the folk; even the Goethean song is an imitation of a
folk-song, not an example of it, and the poet well knew why he
admonished one of his followers with the words: 'My things cannot
become popular; whoever thinks they can and tries to make them so
is in error.'
That it was in any way possible for an art to exist which was so
bright and warm that it would both enlighten the poor and lowly and
melt the arrogance of the learned was something that could not be
divined before it had come about. But now that it has come about, it
must transform every notion of education and culture in the spirit of
everyone who experiences it; it will seem to him that a curtain has
been raised on a future in which there are no longer any great and
good things except those which all hearts share in common. The ill
odour which has hitherto clung to the word 'common' will then have
been removed from it.
If we venture thus to gaze into the future, we are alsÞ aware of the
uncanny social insecurity which characterizes our own times and
cannot conceal from ourselves the peril facing an art which seems to
have no roots at all ifit does not have them in the distant future, and
which reveals to us its blossoming branches rather than the foun­
dation out of which it grows. How can we preserve this homeless an
so that it shall survive into this future? How can we dam the flood of
, the apparently ineluctable revolution in such a way that this happy
anticipation and guarantee of a better future, a freer humanity, is not
also swept away with all that which is dedicated to and wonhy of
destruction?
Whoever feels this anxiety participates in Wagner's anxiety; with
him, he will feel himself driven to seek out those existing powers
which have the will to be the guardian spirits of mankind's noblest
property through these coming times of earthquake and upheaval. It
is only in this sense that Wagner in his writings inquires of the
cultivated whether they are willing to take his legacy, the precious
ring of his art, into their treasure-house; and even the sublime trust
which Wagner has reposed in the German spirit even in respect of its
political goals seems to me to have its origin in his crediting the
nation of the Reformation with that strength, kindness and bravery
needed to 'divert the sea of revolution into the quietly flowing
stream of humanity': and I could almost think that this and nothing
else is what he intended to express through the symbolism of his
Kaisennarsch. *
In general, however, the creative artist's urge to help is too great,
. the horizon of his philanthropy too spacious, for his purview to be
limited to the area bounded by any one nation. His conceptions are,
like those of every great and good German, supra-Gennan, and his an
speaks, not to nations, but to individual men.
But to men of the future.
This is the faith which characterizes him, his torment and his dis­
tinction. No artist at any time in the past has received so remarkable
a dowry from his genius, no one but he has had to imbibe with that
draught of nectar enthusiasm has dispensed for him so sharp a drop
of bitterness. It is not, as one might suppose, the misunderstood,
mistreated and as it were fugitive anist who adopted this faith as a
means of defence: success or failure in the eyes of his con tem-
>liThe Emperor March, composed by Wagner in 1 8 7 1  to celebrate the founding of
the Reich.
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
poraries could neither raise it up nor account for it. Whether it
praised or rejected him, he did not belong to this generation: - that
was the judgment of his instinct; and that there will ever be a gener­
ation, that belongs to him cannot be proved to, him who does not
already believe it. But even this unbeliever can, however, pose the
question as to what a generation would have to be like if Wagner was
to recognize in it his 'folk', as the epitome of all those who feel a need
in common and want to be redeemed from it through an art in com­
mon. Schiller, to be sure, was more believing and more hopeful: he
did not ask what an age would be like if the instinct of the artist who
prophesies it should prove sound, he rather demanded of the
artists:
Erhebet euch mit kiihnem Fliigel
Hoch iiber euren Zeitenlauf!
Fern dammre schon in eurem Spiegel
Das kommende Jahrhundert auf!
- Raise yourselves on daring wing high above your own age! Let the
coming century distantly dawn already in your mirror!
1 1
May sane reason preserve us from the belief that mankind will at any
future time attain to 'a final ideal order of things, and-that happiness
will then shine down upon it with unwavering ray like the sun of the
tropics: with such a beliefWagner has nothing to do, he is no utopian.
If he cannot cease to believe in the future this means no more than
that he perceives in the men of today qualities which do not belong
to the unalterable character and bone-structure of human nature
but are changeable, indeed transitory, and that it is precisely because
of these qualities that art has to be homeless among them and he
himself has to be the herald of another age. No golden age, no cloud­
less sky is allotted to this coming generation to which his instinct
directs him and whose vague lineaments can, so far as it is possible to
infer the nature of the need from the nature of the gratification, be
discerned in the secret writing of his art. Neither will suprahuman
goodness and justice span the fields of this future like an immovable
rainbow. Perhaps this generation as a whole will even seem more evil
than the present generation - for, in wicked as in good things, it will
be more candid; it is possible, indeed, that if its soul should speak out
in free full tones it would shake and terrify our soul as would the
voice of some hitherto concealed evil spirit of nature. Or how do
25 1
these propositions strike us: that passion is better than stoicism and
hypocrisy; that to be honest, even in evil, is better than to lose oneself
in the morality of tradition; that the free man can be good or evil but
the unfree man is a disgrace to nature and is excluded from both
heavenly and eanhly solace; finally, that he who wants to become
free has to become so through his own actions and that freedom falls
into no one's lap like a miraculous gift. However shrill and uncanny
all this may sound, what speaks here is the voice of that world of the
future which has a genuine need of art and which can thus expect
genuine satisfaction from it; it is the language of nature restored also
in the world of man, it is precisely that which I earlier called right
feeling, in contrast to the false feeling which predominates today.
But only nature can enjoy genuine satisfactions and redemptions:
unnature and false feeling cannot do so. If it should become aware of
itself, unnature can only long for nothingness, while nature desires
transformation through love: the former wants not to be, the latter
wants to be different. Let him who has grasped this pass in review, in
all quietness of soul, the simple themes of Wagner's art, and ask him­
self whether it is nature or unnature, as they have just been de­
scribed, where here pursues its goals.
A man homeless and despairing finds redemption from his tor­
ment through the compassionate love of a woman who prefers to die
rather than be unfaithful to him: the theme of the Fliegende Hollander.
- A loving woman, renouncing all happiness for herself, becomes, in
a heavenly transformation of amor into caritas, a saint, and saves the
soul of him she loves: the theme of Tannhiiuser. - The highest and
most glorious descends to men out of desire for them and will not be
asked whence it has come; when the fatal question is asked, under a
painful compulsion it returns to its higher life: the theme of
Lohengrin.
The loving soul of woman and of the folk are happy to
receive the new beneficent genius, although the preservers of tra­
dition defame and repulse it: the theme of the Meistersinger. - Two
lovers who are unaware they are in love, but believe on the contrary
that they are deeply wounded and despised by one another, demand
from one another a death-potion, apparendy to expiate their offence
but in reality from an unconscious impulse: they want to be freed by
death from all separation and dissimulation. The supposed prox­
imity of death unbinds their souls and conducts them to a brief,
dreadful happiness, as though they really had escaped from day and
delusion, indeed from life: the theme of Tristan und Isolde.
In the Ring des Nibelungen the tragic hero is a god who thirsts after
power and who, through neglecting no path to its attainment, binds
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
himself with treaties, loses his freedom, and becomes enmeshed in
the curse which lies upon all power. His unfreedom is brought
home to him especially by the fact that he no longer has any means
of getting possession of the golden ring, the epitome of all earthly
power and representing at the same time the most extreme danger to
himself so long as it is in the possession of his enemies: he is over­
come by fear of the ending and twilight of all the gods and by despair
at being able only to watch this ending approach and do nothing to
prevent it. He needs a free, fearless human being who, without his
assistance or advice, indeed in conflict with the divine order, will of
his own volition perform the deed denied to the god: this human
being is nowhere to be seen, and it is precisely when a new hope of
him dawns that the god is compelled to obey the constraint that
binds him: what he loves most he has to destroy, and has to punish
an act of the purest pity. At length he comes to feel a disgust for
power, which bears in its womb only evil and unfreedom, his will
breaks, he himselflongs for the ending that threatens him from afar.
And only now does there come to pass that which previously he had
most desired: the free, fearless human being appears, born in con­
flict with all that is custom and tradition; his begetters expiate the
fact that their union was counter to the order of nature and morality:
they perish, but Siegfried lives. At the sight of his wonderful evol­
ution and blossoming, disgust gives way in Wotan's soul, he follows
the hero's fortunes with the eye of fatherly love and anxiety. How he
forges the sword for himself, slays the dragon, gains the ring, eludes
the cunningest deception, awakens Brilnnhilde; how the curse that
lies on the ring does not spare even him but approaches him closer
and closer; how, loyal in disloyalty, wounding through love her he
loves most, he is engulfed by the mists and shadows of guilt, but at
last emerges as clear as the sun and goes under, igniting the whole
heavens with his fiery glow and cleansing the world of the curse: all
this the god - whose commanding spear has been shattered in com­
bat with the freest of men, who has thereby deprived him of his
power- beholds with joy at his own defeat, rejoicing and at one with
his conqueror: his eye reposes with the light of a painful blissfulness
upon the concluding events, he has become free in love, free
from himself.
And now ask yourselves, you who are living today! Was this
created for you? Have you the courage to point to the stars in this
celestial vault of beauty and goodness and say: it is our life that
Wagner has set among the stars!
Where among you are those able to interpret the divine image of
Wotan by reference to their own life and who themselves, like him,
grow ever greater the further they withdraw? Which of you will
renounce power, in the knowledge and experience that power is
evil? Where are those who, like Brunnhilde, relinquish their wisdom
out oflove and yet in the end learn from their life the highest wisdom
of all: ' deepest suffering of sorrowing love opened my eyes'.'Ɣ And
where are the free and fearless, those who in innocent selfishness
grow and blossom out of themselves, the Siegfrieds among you?
He who thus asks, and asks in vain, will have to look towards the
future; and if in some remote age his glance should discover pre­
cisely that 'folk' for whom Wagner's art is a record of its own history,
he will also have finally come to understand what Wagner will be to this
folk: something he cannot be to any of us, namely not the seer of a
future, as he would perhaps like to appear to us, but the interpreter
and transfigurer of a past.
*Words of Briinnhilde in one of the many different versions Wagner wrote of the
closing scene of Giitterdiimmerung: not in the final version set to music, but included in
a passage appended as a footnote to the sceD in the 1 872 edition of the Ring
text.