
--- PDF PAGE 401 ---
composed of a single line, is useful to take prisoners and loot unde-
fended places, but is quite useless in battle.112
We encounter viglatores in the text, meaning watchmen in this case
rather than members of the imperial guard regiment named Vigla (from
the distinctly non-elite Vigiles, the municipal guards and ﬁremen of
Rome). These watchmen are to light ﬁres at a good distance from the
camp, so that they stay closer to it in the dark and spot approaching en-
emies; they should have castrated horses, which are quieter. Because
watchmen are outside the camp by themselves, they may be targeted for
capture by the enemy and must be prepared for that.113
Very few battles end because the loser is physically destroyed or en-
tirely encircled with no choice but surrender or death. In most cases it is
the loser who decides the outcome of battles by choosing to withdraw
to avoid further losses when any sort of success no longer seems possi-
ble. That is most likely to happen when the battle has lasted for some
time, the forces on both sides are depleted and exhausted, and one side
is unexpectedly reinforced by fresh forces even if few. (A modern exam-
ple was the epic holding battle of the Israeli Seventh Brigade against the
advance of four successive Syrian divisions in the 1973 October war: af-
ter some seventy hours of nonstop ﬁghting, the Syrians abruptly started
to withdraw when a mere seven tanks arrived to reinforce the Israelis,
who by then could not even stay awake.)
What tips the balance is sometimes material and sometimes psycho-
logical, but more often both, and that is why all wise generals always
keep a force in reserve, however small, even if that weakens the remain-
ing battle force; the entry of fresh forces into the ﬁght, especially if un-
expected, can achieve much greater results than keeping those same
forces in action from the start.
Nikephoros Ouranos recommends a stratagem that exploits the dif-
ference. If the strategos (here, army commander) is waiting for rein-
forcements that fail to arrive, he is to detach a contingent and send it off
some distance surreptitiously. With battle under way, the detachment
can be summoned back to join the ﬁght “with ardor.” The enemy will
think that reinforcements have arrived and may withdraw from the
ﬁght.114
The advice for the general on the eve of battle echoes Onasander’s lit-
erary concoction but passed through the ﬁlter of the author’s very con-
siderable combat experience. During the night, the strategos should
send some cavalry units (tagmata in the text but obviously in the sense
of detachments) to the rear of the enemy, so that in the morning the foe
will be discomﬁted by seeing them.115
386
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 402 ---
The Strategikon of Kekaumenos
According to Alphonse Dain and De Foucault, the ﬁnal work here
examined, the eleventh-century Strategikon of Kekaumenos, does not
even belong to the canon of the Byzantine strategists, but instead is of
the genre of all-purpose advice books because it is only in part con-
cerned with military matters.116 That is true, and the strategic title was
added by the ﬁrst modern editor and is not in the unique manuscript.117
The lack of other testimonies to the text is especially unfortunate be-
cause the manuscript was copied by a monkish scribe who plainly did
not understand what he was writing, so that the successive editors have
had to confront many gross errors and even sequences of meaningless
characters.118
The composition of the text is also problematic in itself, because it
meanders from theme to theme and back again with much repetition;
on the other hand, it is written in the contemporary colloquial Greek
unburdened by the forced classicism of so many Byzantine texts, with
the resulting obscurities.
But the most interesting characteristic of this book is its point of view:
like other manuals it is addressed to the strategos, whether as ﬁeld com-
mander or in charge of a theme, but uniquely its concern is not the
power and glory of the empire but rather the career and personal honor
of the strategos—it is a work of avuncular advice to a younger man, a
relative.119
For example, its version of the familiar homily begins conventionally.
Yes, the strategos must be cautious, but there is no excuse for pusilla-
nimity in claiming concern for the safety of the troops. “If you wanted
to safeguard your army, why did you go into enemy territory?”120
But the advice then offered is not to seek a middle way between cau-
tion and boldness—the safe advice of Onasander and such—but rather
to focus on what really matters: one’s personal reputation, one’s own
honor.121 The strategos should avoid blame for being too timid or too
audacious by mounting some seemingly risky but cunningly planned
operations that will give him a reputation as one to be feared. It is im-
plicit that these would be lesser operations, while the bulk of the troops
would be cautiously handled.
And again, when discussing how the strategos, when in charge of a
theme, should handle his nonmilitary role, Kekaumenos is categorical:
“Never ever accept a position whose duties include tax collection—you
cannot serve both God and Mammon.”122 But it was the empire that
needed the taxes.
The Tenth-Century Military Renaissance
• 387

--- PDF PAGE 403 ---
The same motivation is present when Kekaumenos offers his reading
suggestions: “Read books, histories, ecclesiastical texts. And do not ob-
ject ‘what advantage can a soldier derive from the dogmas and books of
the church?’—they will certainly be useful.” Kekaumenos then points
out that the Bible is ﬁlled with strategic advice and even in the New Tes-
tament there are precepts. But then he moves on to the real motive: “I
want you to evoke everyone’s admiration for your bravery, prudence,
and for your culture.”123
Kekaumenos was not an Enlightenment cynic but a Byzantine one, so
that the text contains its full share of heartfelt and certainly sincere in-
vocations to the deity, but there is no doubt that he calmly writes as if
the empire’s fate is less important than the personal success of his pu-
pil—and is very much aware of that: “These counsels are not found in
any other strategic treatise.”124
Perhaps the explanation is personal, but it could be circumstantial, a
reﬂection of the fallen condition of the empire. The most recent editor
dates the work very closely, between 1075 and 1078, because it refers to
Michael VII Doukas (1071–1078) as the ruling emperor, and to the pa-
triarch of Constantinople, Xiphilinus (1065–1075), as already dead.125
Half a century earlier, when Basil II died in 1025 he left an amply vic-
torious empire that had expanded in all directions, north and west into
the Balkans and Italy, east into Mesopotamia and the Caucasus—an
invasion of Sicily was in prospect. But ﬁfty years is a very long time in
international politics, especially for the Byzantines, who were forever
exposed to the latest arrivals from Central Asia. For centuries Turkic
nations had been moving westward in the steppe corridor north of the
Black Sea, threatening and sometimes overrunning the Danube frontier,
but more recently they had been moving south toward the riches of Iran
and Mesopotamia, converting to Islam along the way. Some had joined
the jihad against the Christian empire as mercenaries, ghilman slave sol-
diers, or enthusiasts under Arab leadership. But then came a changing
of the guard as Turkic warrior-chiefs gradually seized power from Arab
rulers across the central lands of Islam, from Afghanistan to Egypt.
Alp Arslan of the Seljuk ruling family of Oèuz Turks already dominated
Iran and Mesopotamia from the Oxus (Amu Darya) to the Euphrates
when he defeated and captured Romanos IV Diogenes (1067–1071) at
Mantzikert in August 1071, opening the way into Anatolia for his great
many Turkic camp followers.
If the dating 1075–1078 is correct, Kekaumenos was therefore writ-
ing in catastrophic times, for Anatolia was the empire in large degree,
and all but its western edges had fallen under Seljuk rule.126
388
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 404 ---
In spite of its decidedly nonliterary style, perhaps the work of
Kekaumenos is only literature derived from literature, and not from life.
But from the opening passages of the strategic part (at section 24), the
book appears to reﬂect real military experience: intelligence on enemy
capabilities and intentions is absolutely essential—without it, it is im-
possible to achieve good results.
The strategos in charge of the army is therefore enjoined, ﬁrst of all,
to hire a great number of “reliable and dynamic” spies. The term used is
konsarios, from cursatores or protokoursatores, which means a scout-
ing or raiding light cavalry in earlier texts, but in this instance the men
are also supposed to act as covert agents—indeed the text next speciﬁes
that each must work individually with no knowledge of the others, lest
all be lost if one is captured (and successfully interrogated).127 Spies are
not enough, there must also be scouts (sinodikoi) in units of eight, nine,
ten, or more. Only spies have a hope of penetrating enemy headquarters
or the ruler’s palace to steal or at least overhear war plans, but it takes
scouts to detect, monitor, and report enemy actions on the ground that
are already under way. The strategos is advised to be generous with gifts
to his scouts when they perform well, and to talk with them often—to
observe who among them is straightforward and who lies. But he must
not share his plans with them.
The
next
bit
of
advice
reﬂects
bitter
experience,
including
Mantzikert—though it was treason and defection that decided the bat-
tle, there was also a lack of information:
Do everything possible to ﬁnd out, on a daily basis, where enemy the en-
emy is and what he is doing.
Followed by another piece of rueful advice:
Even if the enemy is not cunning, do not underestimate him—act as if he
were ingenious.128
When it comes to the operational method of war, Kekaumenos is
strictly orthodox, repeating the advice of all the previous ﬁeld manuals
since the Strategikon of Maurikios, the advice that contains the very es-
sence of the distinctive Byzantine style of war: constantly gather intelli-
gence all around, campaign vigorously, but ﬁght only in small doses,
avoiding all-out battles for decisive victory, because there is no such
thing—only a brief respite until the arrival of the next enemy, when yes-
terday’s losses on both sides would be regretted.
But once engaged in battle, there is no retreating, for that would de-
moralize the troops. Therefore before the battle the enemy must be
The Tenth-Century Military Renaissance
• 389

--- PDF PAGE 405 ---
probed and tested with lesser attacks, both to determine his strength
and also to ﬁnd out how he ﬁghts—for it could be an entirely new
enemy that the empire has never fought before—another echo of
Mantzikert. Kekaumenos was familiar with the military classics and ex-
pected his readers to know them as well—at any rate that is his stated
reason for not writing on battle dispositions.129
Instead the strategos is urged to ﬁnd out the ethnicity of the enemy
before deploying his forces, because some peoples traditionally ﬁght in a
single phalanx, others in two, others still in open order. The author
writes that the best battle formation is the Roman one, but gives no rea-
sons for this judgment, most likely because Roman superiority in all
military things was taken for granted.
The tone throughout is benign, but on one point the author is ﬁerce:
he favors the death penalty for a commander who is surprised by an en-
emy incursion against his encampment. Many sentries are to be posted
all around, even where attack seems most unlikely, for the strategos
should never have to say, “I did not expect an attack in that part [of the
perimeter]” to which the reply is, “You had an enemy? If so, how could
you not think of the worst contingency?”130 This passage echoes previ-
ous manuals but may also reﬂect personal experience (as in my own
case): it is easier to post sentries than to ensure that they remain awake
night after night, even though nothing ever happens—except, of course,
on the one night when the sentries are asleep.
A series of injunctions follows (sections 32–33): “Do not underesti-
mate the enemy because they are barbarians [ethnikon in the text, not
barbaroi], because they too have the power of reason, innate wisdom,
and cunning”; and “If meeting the unexpected, behave bravely to give
courage to your subordinates. If you are overcome by panic, who will
be able to drive and encourage the army?” As for dealing with envoys
visiting the encampment, Kekaumenos echoes the familiar Byzantine
procedures:
They should camp in a low-lying place, and a reliable man must stay with
them so that they cannot spy on your army. They must not stroll about nor
talk with anyone without permission. Moreover, if there is something re-
ally important do not let them in at all, instead read their letter, reply and
send them off with magniﬁcent gifts . . . they will praise you.131
These are all very familiar themes, but there is also a very interesting
appeal for original thought, the greatest commonplace for modern man
390
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 406 ---
who is forever being told how clever it is to reinvent everything all the
time, but most unusual in Byzantine culture:
If you are sure that the chief (archenos) of the people against which
you are ﬁghting is cunning, be watchful for devilish expedients. You too
should come up with countermeasures—not just those learned from the
ancients—invent new ones. And do not object that it has not been passed
down from the ancients.
Kekaumenos respected the ancients as much as the next man, but evi-
dently felt it necessary to disenthrall his readers.132
Kekaumenos again takes on unspeciﬁed ancients—not Onasander
this time—when he contradicts the advice that an army that has ﬂed
from battle should be kept out of war for three years:
I say instead: “If right away, on the same day as the debacle you can collect
even just one fourth of your army do not be fearful like the rabbit-hearted,
get those whom you have been able to gather and throw yourself against
the enemy. Not frontally of course but initially from the rear or the ﬂank,
both that day and that night.”
That is excellent advice because, as Kekaumenos remarks, the enemy
having won the battle will not be watchful, can be caught by surprise,
and thus defeat might be turned into victory.133 (That is how the Ger-
man army, increasingly outgunned and outnumbered from 1943, pro-
longed its resistance to the advancing Red Army. Just as Kekaumenos
prescribed, it habitually counterattacked immediately after suffering
defeats. Nothing is more difﬁcult materially or psychologically—the
troops are demoralized, units disorganized, supplies short—and noth-
ing is more effective, because it takes away the enemy’s momentum. Red
Army troops dashing forward after a breakthrough would run into
counterattacks from troops last seen ﬂeeing in panic. Ofﬁcers with pis-
tols drawn would form retreating troops into improvised alarmheiten to
mount counterattacks that often inﬂicted disproportionate casualties.
Thus the German army’s excellent ofﬁcers gained more time for their
colleagues in the extermination branch, who killed most of their victims
in the ﬁnal year of a war prolonged by sheer tactical skill.)
This piece of advice alone shows that whoever he was, and whether
he did or did not have military experience, Kekaumenos did understand
the dynamics of combat.
The cold-blooded realism that pervades these pages is best illustrated
by the advice on how to deal with enemy envoys asking for gold under
The Tenth-Century Military Renaissance
• 391

--- PDF PAGE 407 ---
the threat of attack: pay them, because the loss will be less than the
damage that would be inﬂicted on imperial territory, and besides, battle
is always a gamble.134 As we saw, even when the Romans were very
strong, they were always willing to buy off enemies if it was cheaper
than ﬁghting them—not for them the “Millions for defense, but not one
cent for tribute” slogan of U.S. Representative Robert Goodloe Harper;
since he said that on June 18, 1798, some millions have indeed been
spent. Romans and Byzantines were less romantic, but Kekaumenos
goes much further: “Refuse enemy demands to give up territory, un-
less . . . he accepts to be your liege and pay tribute”; a case of feudal
subsidiarity, if such terms be allowed, or—it gets worse—“if there is
pressing necessity.” In other words, do what you can.135
Kekaumenos is much more optimistic on the offensive, when the en-
emy remains ensconced in a fortiﬁed city: “If you do not know the mag-
nitude of his force, believe me, he has few men and insufﬁcient forces.”
His advice is to send out konsarios—the latest version of the same old
cursatores/prokoursatores, to ﬁnd a way into the fortiﬁed town—“and
do not credit anyone who says that there is no way in—how can such a
large area be kept fully under watch?” Once the way in is found, do not
go there but remain arrayed in front of the enemy while sending in some
well-led men, who once inside are to signal by smoke or ﬁre. Then at-
tack.136
Among the Byzantine strategists, Kekaumenos is a lesser ﬁgure, but
his book, for all its meanderings, shows that there was still a live mili-
tary culture in which men of affairs where supposed to read military
treatises, or even to write one. This gave the Byzantines a real advantage
in facing the vicissitudes of their unending wars: a broader range of pro-
cedures, tactics, and operational methods than their enemies had, so
that they were less often surprised and could themselves more often sur-
prise their enemies, with one more tactic, operational method, or un-
known stratagem.
392
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 408 ---
W
c h a p t e r 1 5
Strategic Maneuver:
Herakleios Defeats Persia
The deepest and boldest theater-level maneuver in the whole of
Byzantine history was launched in desperate circumstances to rescue the
empire from imminent destruction. It ended with the total defeat of
Sasanian Persia.
In the year 603, Khusrau (Chrosoes) II (590–628) had launched the
most ambitious and the most successful of all Sasanian offensives.
All previous wars since the establishment of the Sasanian dynasty in
224, by Ardashir, grandson of the Zoroastrian priest Sasan, were fought
over the control of the borderlands between the two empires: historic
Armenia, now mostly in northeast Turkey, the Caucasian lands, and—
of greater importance for both empires—upper Mesopotamia on both
sides of the Tigris and the Euphrates, now in southeast Turkey. On the
Mesopotamian front, the strongly fortiﬁed trading cities of Edessa
(modern ùanlÕurfa, Urfa), Nisibis (Nusaybin), Dara (Oèuz), and Amida
(Diyarbakir) changed hands repeatedly from war to war. The balance
of the evidence is that in spite of boasts and claims—according to
Ammianus Marcellinus, Shapur II (309–379) wrote to Constantius II to
claim Persian control as far as the river Strymon and the borders of
Macedonia by right of ancient conquest—most Sasanian rulers were ac-
tually moderate in their war aims.1 In spite of intense suspicion, they too
recognized the Roman and Byzantine empires as their civilized neigh-
bors that were not to be destroyed—so they were mostly content with
limited gains in Mesopotamia when they went to war.
But Khusrau II was entirely more ambitious. His declared aim was to
remove and replace emperor Phokas (602–610), whom he condemned

--- PDF PAGE 409 ---
as an upstart and usurper—both of which Phokas certainly was, hav-
ing seized power by mutiny when a hekatontarchos, commander of
a hundred—in modern terms a captain or perhaps a company sergeant-
major. Revenge was another declared motive, for the murder of
Phokas’s predecessor Maurikios (582–602), whom Khusrau claimed,
again correctly, as his own patron and political father: as a young man,
he had been sheltered at the imperial court in Constantinople from the
deadly intrigues of Sasanian palace politics. Finally, it was also the pro-
claimed aim of Khusrau to propagate the ancient Zoroastrian religion
of Persia and Iran, the dualist cult of Ahura Mazda, “God of Light and
Goodness,” which had once been the closest competitor to Christianity
within the Roman empire as the old pagan cults were fading.
The scale of Khusrau’s victories matched his ambitions.
In 610–611, Sasanian armies entered Syria and conquered Antioch,
one of the largest cities of the empire.2 By then they had taken the rich
trading center of Edessa—its churches reportedly yielded a booty of
112,000 pounds of silver.3 In 613 the Sasanians seized Emesa (Homs,
Hims) and Damascus, then descending to capture Jerusalem in May
614, where they seized a celebrated fragment of the “true cross.” Egypt,
394
• The Byzantine Art of War
Map 12. The Sasanian empire, ca. 226–ca. 651

--- PDF PAGE 410 ---
the largest single source of Byzantine tax revenues and grain supplies,
was next: by 619 Alexandria had fallen, completing the conquest.
Sasanian armies threatened the survival of the empire even more di-
rectly by penetrating into its core territory of Anatolia. By 611 they won
a major victory at Caesarea of Cappadocia (Kayseri), and in 626 a
Sasanian army would reach all the way west to the Asiatic shore directly
opposite Constantinople across the Bosporus, at that point less than a
mile wide.
Nor could the Byzantines concentrate all their forces against the Per-
sians, because another formidable enemy had advanced across the Bal-
kans into Thrace and its peninsula, which contains Constantinople it-
self. It was in response to Hun incursions of two centuries before that
the Theodosian Wall had been built to guard the city with its moat,
walls, and ﬁghting towers. An insurmountable barrier for many an in-
vader until then, the Theodosian Wall offered no such guarantee against
the enemy that camped before it in July 626.
The qaganate of the Avars had already defeated several Byzantine
ﬁeld forces and had already captured well-fortiﬁed cities before invad-
ing Thrace in 618–619; and they had already been bought off in 620
and 623, before attacking Constantinople once again in 626. Like the
Huns before them, Avar mounted archers could penetrate targets at
long ranges with their composite bows, but they were much more than
just light cavalry—they could also ﬁght as heavy cavalry by charging
with the lance. They could therefore execute two-step attacks, ﬁrst driv-
ing their enemies into packed close-order formations by threaten-
ing to charge or actually charging, and then using their bows to launch
volleys of arrows into the dense mass. Moreover, in addition to their
major improvements on Hun cavalry equipment and tactics, which the
Byzantines studiously imitated, the Avars were also expert in siegecraft
and in the construction and operation of artillery, or at any rate of
highly effective trebuchets. In the contemporary Chronicon Paschale we
read that in besieging Constantinople in 626 the Avars deployed
a multitude of siege engines close to each other. . . . He [the “God-
abhorred Chagan”] bound together his stone-throwers [for stability on re-
leasing heavy shot] and covered them outside with hides [as protection
against arrows] and . . . prepared to station 12 lofty [mobile] siege towers,
which were advanced almost as far as the outworks, and he covered them
with hides.
There was a countermeasure to such siege towers: navy sailors had
joined the defenders on the wall, and one of them “constructed a mast
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 395

--- PDF PAGE 411 ---
and hung a skiff on it, intending by means of it to burn the enemies’
siege towers.”4
We later learn from the same source that the Avars also constructed
a palisade as a form of circumvallation, to deny easy counterattack
opportunities to the besieged, and erected mantelets, that is, wooden
frames covered in hides, to shield the besiegers from missiles.5 That is
evidence enough that, unlike most nomads, the Avars had the technol-
ogy needed to defeat fortiﬁcations.
Moreover, like Attila before him, and like other successful steppe po-
tentates after him, the qagan of the Avars who reached the walls of Con-
stantinople in 626 had gathered a much larger mass of other warriors
around the elite core of his own Avar cavalry, in this case some Ger-
manic Gepids and Slavs in great numbers. Finally the qagan evidently
had his own talents of intelligence and diplomacy, because he arrived to
attack Constantinople from the European side just when a Sasanian
army that had advanced all the way to the western edge of Anatolia was
camped on the Asiatic shore directly across the Bosporus in front of the
city. The Chronicon Paschale records that when a delegation from the
city went to negotiate with the Avars,
the Chagan brought within their sight three Persians dressed in pure
silk who had been sent to him from Salbaras [Shahrbaraz, chief of that
Sasanian army] and he arranged that they should be seated in his presence,
while our envoys should stand. And he said, “Look, the Persians have sent
an embassy to me, and are ready to give me 3,000 men in alliance. There-
fore if each of you in [Constantinople] is prepared to take no more than a
cloak and a shirt, we will make a compact with Salbaras, for he is my
friend: cross over to him and he will not harm you; leave me your city and
property. For otherwise it is impossible for you to be saved [given that
Avars and Persians controlled all the land on both sides of the Bosporus],
unless you become ﬁsh and depart by sea, or birds and ascend the sky.6
Ever since he had seized power from Phokas in 610, Herakleios had
been trying to ﬁght against the offensives of Khusrau II, sometimes win-
ning and sometimes losing battles, and twice being forced to retreat al-
together to confront the Avars. The net result was that by 622 all that
remained of the empire beyond its capital, Greece, and the uninvaded
part of Anatolia were scattered islands, coastal tracts, and thinly garri-
soned cities in North Africa, Sicily, Italy, and the Dalmatian coast—
none of them really valuable as sources of revenue or recruits. The result
was the exhaustion of the imperial treasury, further depleted by futile
attempts to appease the Avar qagan with tribute. In the face of the
396
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 412 ---
deadly and immediate threat of the combined attack on Constantinople
by the Avars with their mass of Slav warriors and the Sasanian Persians,
the money needed to keep ﬁghting was running out. Under the year
6113 since the creation (622 CE) the Chronicle of Theophanes records
the extreme measures taken by Herakleios:
He took on loan the moneys of religious establishments and he also took
the candelabra and other vessels of the holy ministry from the Great
Church, which he minted into a great quantity of gold and silver coin
[nomismata, gold coins, 72 to the pound; and milaresia, silver coins, ex-
changed at 12 to the nomisma].7
Ever since the Sasanian invasion had started nineteen years before in
603, Byzantine forces had been battered again and again, in defeats, re-
treats, and the outright collapse of frontier and city defenses. But evi-
dently surviving units, fragments of units, individual veterans, and new
recruits rallied around Herakleios, whose ability to lead them to victory
was entirely unproven, but who could certainly pay them:
Having found, then, the army in a state of great sluggishness, cowardice,
indiscipline, and disorder, and scattered over many parts of the earth, he
speedily gathered everyone together.8
The opportunity to raise morale in the usual way, by stressing the iniq-
uity of the enemy, was not missed, according to Theophanes, who cites
Herakleios speaking to the troops in very familiar manner unusual for
an emperor, if only to incite them by arousing their religious resentment:
You see, O my brethren and children, how the enemies of God have tram-
pled upon our land, have laid our cities waste, have burnt our sanctuaries
. . . and . . . how they deﬁle with their impassioned pleasures our churches.
But training was the main thing, with the learning of individual combat
skills leading to full-scale battle exercises by complete formations, whose
realism evidently made a great impression on the source that informed
Theophanes—unless he is relaying what he witnessed of the army of his
own time (he died in 818), which certainly exercised in the same realis-
tic manner.
[Herakleios] . . . formed two armed contingents, and the trumpeters, the
ranks of the shield-bearers and men in armor stood by. When he had se-
curely marshalled the two [sides] he bade them attack each other: there
were violent collisions . . . and a semblance of war was to be seen. One
could observe a frightening sight, yet one without the fear of danger, mur-
derous clashes without blood.9
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 397

--- PDF PAGE 413 ---
Later that year, the new army of Herakleios won some minor battles, or
possibly only skirmishes, in ﬁghting against the Sasanian forces in south-
east Anatolia, but in 623 another Avar advance on Constantinople forced
him to return, only to be almost captured himself when he tried to nego-
tiate with the Avar qagan.
The suburbs of the city were devastated by Avar looting and there
was certainly a land blockade, but no determined assaults, as far as we
know. In any case, on March 25, 624, Herakleios set out to launch his
ﬁrst serious counteroffensive against Sasanian Persia.
By then everything else had been tried, including an attempt to come
to terms with a dominant Persia by a negotiated surrender. According to
the Chronicon Paschale, in the 615, after major defeat before the walls
of Antioch, the loss of Syria, and the fall of Jerusalem, when the ﬁrst
Persian incursion through Anatolia had reached the Sea of Marmara
shore opposite Constantinople, a letter was sent to Khusrau II, practi-
cally accepting his overlordship, whereby Byzantium would become a
client-state under the traditional Persian system of indirect rule:
We . . . having . . . conﬁdence in . . . God and your majesty, have sent [to
you] your slaves Olympius the most glorious former consul, patrician and
praetorian prefect, and Leontius the most glorious former consul, patri-
cian and city prefect, and Anastasius the most God-loved presbyter [of
Hagia Sophia]; we beseech that they may be received in appropriate man-
ner by your superabundant Might. We beg too of your clemency to con-
sider Heraclius, our most pious emperor, as a true son, one who is eager to
perform the service of your Serenity in all things.10
According to the Armenian chronicle attributed to Sebeos, Herakleios
himself sent his own letter addressed to Shahin, the Sasanian com-
mander on the scene, stating his own willingness to accept whomever
Khusrau should appoint: “If he should say: I shall install a king for you,
let him install whom he wishes, and we shall accept him.”11
As it turned out, these peace initiatives failed, but there was no attack
on Constantinople in 615 because Khusrau’s armies were diverted to in-
stead invade Egypt, of greater economic value than battered and be-
sieged Constantinople, and much easier to conquer.
So it was not until 622 that a supposed reply by Khusrau is recorded.
The text contained in the Armenian history of Sebeos seems designed to
evoke religious indignation; perhaps it was deliberately distorted, if not
outrightly forged, by Herakleios himself as a piece of propaganda, to
stiffen Byzantine resistance.
398
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 414 ---
That it was propaganda, or at least that it contained disinformation,
is suggested by the quotations from Isaiah and the Psalms—language
most unlikely to be used by Khusrau, who had endowed his war with a
strongly religious dimension, as the struggle of the Zoroastrian wor-
shippers of Ahura Mazda, “the God of Light,” against the Christian
empire:12
[I, Khusrau], honored among the gods, lord and king of all the earth, and
offspring of the great Aramazd [Ahura Mazda], to Heraclius our senseless
and insigniﬁcant servant. . . .
Having collected an army of brigands, you give me no rest. You claim to
trust in your god. Why did he not save Caesarea [of Cappadocia] and Jeru-
salem and the great Alexandria [of Egypt] from my hands? Do you not
know that I have subjected to myself the sea and the dry land? So it is only
Constantinople that I shall not be able to erase?13
Further increasing the likelihood of forgery, the next passage in the let-
ter seems designed to enhance the authority of Herakleios as a war
leader, because its offer of generous terms for himself implies that his
campaigning is selﬂess:
However, I shall forgive you all your trespasses. “Arise, take your wife and
children and come here. I shall give you estates, vineyards and olive trees
whereby you may make a living” [Isaiah, 36.16–17]. . . . Let not your vain
hope deceive you.14
Diplomacy having failed, and defensive operations having failed also,
allowing Avar and Sasanian forces to converge on Constantinople,
Herakleios set out on March 25, 624, with his newly trained army to
launch a counteroffensive.
The safe course would have been to push back the Sasanian armies
step by step across the length of Anatolia and back into Mesopotamia—
except that all the candelabra and vessels of the churches of Constanti-
nople could not have paid for an army large enough to advance by sheer
strength in a frontal offensive.
Moreover, even if successful initially—unlikely given the ratio of
forces—a frontal offensive could not have succeeded for long, because it
would have allowed Khusrau full warning and ample time to recall the
Sasanian garrisons scattered in Egypt and Syria to reinforce his armies
facing Herakleios.
Accepting the huge risk of leaving Constantinople to defend itself,
Herakleios took his forces in a deep-penetration offensive, or if one pre-
fers, a strategic raid, all the way east through what was then Armenia
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 399

--- PDF PAGE 415 ---
and is now northeast Turkey, to reach the original Sasanian heartland in
what is now northwest Iran. Great boldness was rewarded by complete
surprise.
The army of Herakleios seems to have been little resisted as it went
through Theodosiopolis (Erzerum) and what is now the province of
Ayrarat, capturing and looting Dvin, before reaching and destroying the
great Zoroastrian temple at Takht-I-Suleiman, extinguishing the eternal
ﬁre of Vshnasp, as Sebeos called it, or more correctly Adur Gushnasp,
near Ganzak, the Greek Gazaca, capital of Media Atropatene, near
Takab in modern western Azerbaijan, now still within Iran.15
This was no doubt revenge for the burning of the Jerusalem churches
in 614, but it is impossible to believe that it was not also a calculated
move designed to provoke Khusrau into a frantic and ill-prepared re-
sponse, because Adur Guhnasp was very much his dynasty’s sanctu-
ary.16 That is what actually happened: separate and uncoordinated
Sasanian armies were sent to intercept Herakleios, and his men defeated
at least one of them, led by the most distinguished of Sasanian ﬁeld
commanders, Shahrbaraz, before encamping for the winter.
In March 625 Herakleios retreated rapidly from Armenia to the
warmer plains of southeast Anatolia, crossing through the mountain
pass of the Cilician Gates (modern Turkey’s Gülek Boèazi). At one point
he was again pursued by Shahrbaraz, but all Persian attempts to com-
bine forces against his own highly mobile army failed. It was an excep-
tionally sustained and especially successful implementation of the oper-
ational method recommended for outnumbered forces by the manual
Peri Strategikes, discussed in Chapter 10.
This war of movement was conducted within Anatolia, imperial terri-
tory that is.17 Much of it is mountainous, but even there interrupted by
fertile, well-watered valleys, while in southern Anatolia there were the
richer coastal plains of Cappadocia and Cilicia. That explains how the
army of Herakleios could survive at all. It was clearly not the treasury
in Constantinople, starved of imperial revenues, that was feeding his
armies, but locally collected taxes, contributions from churches and
monasteries in those parts, and, no doubt, forceful requisitions. More-
over, all the sources concur that the marching and ﬁghting on both sides
came to an end each year with the approach of winter. It can be very
harsh in Anatolia, not only in rugged mountain country but in the
plains as well, at least in the interior where even the plains are mostly
fairly high plateaus.
Troops could be hardened for winter campaigning—it was done at
400
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 416 ---
times by Roman commanders, who acquired fame as disciplinarians for
keeping men in tents in all weathers. That was not, however, a practice
that Herakleios was likely to imitate if he could help it: his predecessor
once removed, arguably his direct legitimate predecessor, Maurikios
(582–602), had been overthrown and killed by mutineers when he or-
dered the army to set out for a winter campaign against the Avars and
the Slavs, after long months of ﬁghting. Their leader, Phokas (602–610),
seized the imperial power as many had done before him, but lacked the
political talent to fabricate an atmosphere of legitimacy, and the result-
ing turmoil provided the opportunity for Khusrau’s invasion.
Outnumbered as he was, and chased by more than one Persian force,
Herakleios could not have simply stopped when the cold weather ar-
rived, if the Sasanian troops had not already stopped before him—as
they must have done. It was not that the Sasanian troops were less
hardy than the Byzantine, but their horses needed fodder to survive af-
ter October, when green pasture runs out in the mountainous parts of
Anatolia, and so they had to retreat to winter quarters where they had
stored fodder, staying there more or less immobile till the spring.
This logistic detail became a factor of great importance in the ensuing
events. An expectation had been built up that whatever else Herakleios
might do, he would retreat to imperial territory in Anatolia and take
shelter in well-stocked quarters before winter set in—just as he had
done in 624 and then again in 625.
That created the conditions for strategic surprise in 627, when he
continued to advance right through the winter. Byzantine horses were
no different from those of the Sasanians, but very different horses did
exist in the world, and they would soon arrive on the scene in the most
dramatic way possible.
Herakleios was still away from Constantinople on June 29, 626, when
the city came under the convergent attack of the Avars with their siege
engines, their Slav followers, and the Sasanian army of Shahrbaraz. Ac-
cording to the Chronicon Paschale:
[Some Avars] approached the venerated church of the Holy Maccabees
(in Galata, across the Golden Horn from Constantinople); they made
themselves visible to the Persians, who had congregated in the region of
Chrysopolis [Üsküdar, on the Asiatic ashore directly opposite Constanti-
nople] and they made their presence known to each other by ﬁre signals.18
Both Avars and Persians had been there before, but separately. That
they concerted their moves in 626 to attack the city at the same time is
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 401

--- PDF PAGE 417 ---
probable—Theophanes stated it: “As for Sarbaros [= Shahrbaraz], he
[Khusrau] dispatched him with his remaining army against Constanti-
nople with a view to establishing an alliance between the Western Huns
[Avars] and the . . . Slavs, and so advancing on the City and laying siege
to it.”19
Even if the two sides were perfectly coordinated at the political level,
that did nothing for the operational coordination of the two armies—
and it was chieﬂy armies that were attacking the maritime city of Con-
stantinople, which projected into the sea with only a narrow landward
side, and that too strongly fortiﬁed. Neither the Sasanians nor the Avars
had ships with them, let alone warships. The qagan’s solution was to
send his Slav subjects in their small boats, monoxyla (= one tree = dug-
outs), to attack the seaward side of the city that faces the Golden Horn,
where there was a protecting seawall but much weaker than the triple
Theodosian Wall. The same small boats were to ferry Sasanian troops
across. They “ﬁlled the gulf of the Horn with an immense multitude,
beyond all number, whom they had brought from the Danube in
[monoxyla].”20 The Slav boats were no match for the galleys and skiffs
of the Byzantine navy with their skilled crews and embarked bowmen.
All the catastrophic defeats that had deprived the empire of its most
valuable lands, and much of its army, could not have done equal dam-
age to the navy of an empire that still had coastal possessions in North
Africa, southern Spain, Sicily, Italy, Crete, Cyprus, and many Aegean is-
lands.
The Byzantine navy waxed and waned, but it was powerful enough
from July 29 to August 7, 626, the day when both Avars and Sasanians
gave up their sieges. In the Chronicon Paschale we read: “70 of our
skiffs sailed up towards Chalae, even though the wind was against
them, so as to prevent the [monoxyla] from crossing over.”21 These were
not warships, but they were boats of some size, not common “skiffs,”
ﬂat-bottomed rowing boats. The revealing detail that they sailed against
the wind implies skilled crews and well-rigged sails as well as a combat
capability with bowmen.
The Armenian history of Sebeos reports “a battle at sea, from which
the Persian army returned in shame. They had lost 4,000 men with their
ships.”22 The Chronicon Paschale describes the fate of the Slavs:
They sank [the boats] and slew all the Slavs found in the canoes. And the
Armenians [infantry] too came out from the [sea] wall . . . and threw ﬁre
into the portico which is near St. Nicholas. And the Slavs who had escaped
402
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 418 ---
by diving from the canoes thought, because of the ﬁre, that those posi-
tioned by the sea were Avars, and when they came out [from the water] . . .
they were slain by the Armenians.23
When the siege was abandoned, the Sasanian troops of Shahrbaraz re-
treated into eastern Anatolia to pursue Herakleios once more, and the
qagan dismantled his siege engines under a truce while threatening
to return, though many of his Slavs were departing in discord; as we
saw, their dissent may have been encouraged and rewarded by the
Byzantines.
Having failed to seize the city, having certainly eaten out the sur-
roundings during the monthlong siege, Avars and Slavs had to raid else-
where for their food. In normal circumstances, Byzantine armies on the
move could summon convoys of carts loaded with food as the Romans
had done before them, and could therefore mount long sieges lasting
months even after the country roundabout had been stripped bare.
The Avars had no such logistics based on tax collection—they de-
pended on tribute and simple extortion. That obviously worked well
enough for them, and besides with their many horses for warriors, for
family members and servants too, the Avars could forage in a wide ra-
dius to sustain long sieges. The Slavs had fewer horses—few indeed, it
seems—and were far too numerous to be fed by propitiatory food gifts
from the besieged. So they left, and that alone would have forced the
qagan to give up the siege, because while the Avars were tactically so
dominant that they could overawe many Slavs, they were too few to be-
siege the six kilometers of the Theodosian Wall.
The war of movement that Herakleios had been conducting ever since
March 624 changed drastically in the autumn of 627.24
Once again he advanced eastward into the Caucasus, and was no
doubt expected to retreat once again with the approach of winter. But
this was no raid, however “strategic”; it was a full-scale, deep-penetra-
tion offensive. It was made possible by the powerful reinforcement of
Herakleios’s by now experienced, highly mobile, but necessarily small
army. Riding the small, hardy horses (or ponies) that ﬁrst appeared with
the Huns and would return to Europe for the last time six hundred years
later with the Mongols, mounted archers from the steppe lands had ar-
rived by way of the Caspian plains, “40,000 brave men” according to
Theophanes in the year 6117 since the creation.25
They were brought by a much grander Turkic qagan than his Avar
counterpart: “Ziebel” in Theophanes but undoubtedly the Tong Yabghu
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 403

--- PDF PAGE 419 ---
who was chief ruler of the western qaganate of the vast Türk empire
that stretched all the way from China to the Black Sea, and that was
then disintegrating, or head of its emerging successor, the Khazar
qaganate—or both of these things, given that the Khazars certainly
came out of the larger qaganate.26 Be that as it may, the people of Tong
Yabghu were former allies and present enemies of Sasanian Persia,
whose inﬂuence in Central Asia naturally collided with the Turkic inter-
est, under whatever name—the ancestral (and continuing) competition
between Iran and Turan. Moreover, they were the hereditary enemies of
the Avars, who had originally ruled the Türks and then had ﬂed west-
ward from them. To the Türks, the Avars who had just failed to take
Constantinople were “slaves . . . who had ﬂed their masters . . . [ﬁt only
to be] trampled under the hooves of our horses, like ants.”27
Even this boldest of Byzantine offensives could not be a military ac-
tion alone. It was preceded, accompanied, made possible, and followed
by energetic efforts to secure allies and divide enemies by all possible
means.
The arrival of the mounted archers was not a fortuitous event. The
Byzantines had been negotiating with the western Türk qaganate for de-
cades by sending envoys in long and perilous journeys. And De
Administrando Imperio claims that the envoys of Herakleios were in-
strumental in the political separation of the future Serbs and Croats
from the undifferentiated mass of the Slav followers of the Avars, who
were then persuaded to actively oppose the Avars before ﬂeeing from
them northward to where they still reside.28
Evidently Herakleios was a very great ﬁeld commander, but without
concurrent efforts to persuade, induce, and dissuade, he could hardly
have won his war. He failed to appease Khusrau, or the Avar qagan, but
he did much better by inducing Serb and Croat tribes to defect from the
Avars, and above all by recruiting Tong Yabghu.
According to Theophanes, Herakleios did even more, successfully
subverting Shahrbaraz, Khusrau’s leading general, when he was within
easy reach during the siege of Constantinople.29 Subsequent events, how-
ever, leave us uncertain about Shahrbaraz’s loyalties, so the complicated
intrigue recorded by Theophanes may be romance.
With thousands of formidable mounted archers added to his force,
Herakleios could obviously maneuver far more freely, because Sasanian
pursuit forces were more likely to turn away than to ﬁght against such
poor odds. The Turkic allies also brought with them another advantage,
or rather rode upon it: while the horses of the Byzantine and Sasanian
404
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 420 ---
cavalry had to be fed in winter at least, their Mongol horses (or ponies)
could survive in almost any terrain that had almost any vegetation, even
under the thin layer of icy snow typical of the windy steppe in winter—
and of the hill country of northwest Iran where Herakleios was headed.
Setting out from Tbilisi—now the capital of Georgia—in September
627, Herakleios led his small army with his formidable allies in a vast
turning movement hinged on Lake Urmia, now in northwest Iran, to
then move south, crossing the Greater Zab River to reach Nineveh by
the Tigris River, once the great Assyrian capital mentioned in Genesis,
and now the very large and unprepossessing Iraqi city of Mosul.
Khusrau had sent a large army under Roch Vehan to pursue Herakleios,
though the Persians could not overtake the Byzantines to force them
into battle. But on December 12, 627, it was Herakleios who chose to
give battle, suddenly turning to confront the Sasanian army. The Arme-
nian history of Sebeos offers a glimpse of the battle, enough to recognize
the tactical style of Herakleios as ﬁeld commander—ﬁrst maneuver to
confuse the enemy to achieve surprise, only then attack:
Joining forces [the Sasanians] pursued Herakleios. But Herakleios drew
them on as far as the plain of Nineveh; then he turned back to attack them
with great force. There was mist on the plain and the Persian army did not
realize that Herakleios had turned against them until they encountered
each other . . . [the Byzantines] massacred them to a man.30
It was important to deplete Sasanian strength, but the decisive new
fact was that the forces of Herakleios had penetrated into the deep rear
of the hugely expanded territory conquered by Khusrau’s armies, and
could strike at the vital centers of Sasanian power in what is now central
Iraq. The empire was deﬁnitely Persian, but the Sasanian capital was in
Mesopotamia, at Ctesiphon on the Tigris River, less than twenty miles
south of modern Baghdad. It was certainly one of the largest cities in the
world, if not the largest—and now it was exposed to Byzantine attack,
for Khusrau’s past victories and past conquests had created an unsolv-
able strategic problem: Sasanian armies were scattered across a wide arc
from remote Egypt to Syria and into distant Anatolia—all of them much
too far away to come back in time and intervene quickly enough to stop
Herakleios before he did more damage. Had the Sasanians not been so
sure that Herakleios would again retreat in winter as he had done each
year till then, they could certainly have withdrawn enough troops from
Egypt and Syria to defend their core territory.
For Herakleios, the victory at Nineveh meant ﬁrst of all the solution
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 405

--- PDF PAGE 421 ---
of all his logistic problems. Khusrau had many palaces instead of just
one or two, a Sasanian habit that reemerged with Saddam Hussein and
for the same reason—each was a simulacrum of power to overawe the
surroundings. Khusrau’s palaces, moreover, were built in the classic Per-
sian style, with large, paradisaical gardens rather than especially large
buildings, including zoological gardens ﬁlled with both exotic and do-
mestic animals—all meat on the hoof for hungry troops:
He found therein in one [palace] enclosure 300 corn-fed ostriches, and in
another about 500 corn-fed gazelles, and in another 100 corn-fed wild as-
sess [onagers], and all of these he gave to his soldiers. And they celebrated
1 January there [not our January 1]. They also found sheep, pigs and oxen
without number, and the whole army rested contentedly.31
Next Herakleios continued south toward Ctesiphon, the capital, cross-
ing the Lesser Zab by the end of January 628 before advancing some
two hundred miles across the river Diyala to seize another, much larger
palace at Dastagard. Theophanes relishes the result:
In his palace of [Dastagard], the Roman army found 300 Roman stan-
dards which the Persians had captured at different times. They also found
. . . a great quantity of aloes . . . much silk and pepper. More linen shirts
than one could count, sugar, ginger, and many other goods. . . . They also
found in this palace an inﬁnite number of ostriches, gazelles, wild asses,
peacocks and pheasant, and in the hunting park huge live lions and
tigers.32
There is also evidence of how swiftly Herakleios moved, and of the ex-
tent of the surprise he pulled off, because Theophanes records that
many palace ofﬁcials were captured.
In itself, as purely military events, the defeat at Nineveh, and even the
subsequent advance of the Byzantine army down the Tigris Valley to-
ward Ctesiphon, need not have been catastrophic for Khusrau. He still
had large intact forces at his command that were still occupying the vast
territories newly won, which obviously required substantial garrisons.
His ﬁeld commander Shahrbaraz was in Syria, with a large army that
could have returned to protect the capital Ctesiphon.
What happened next shows that the constant warfare that had lasted
for a quarter of a century had ﬁnally exhausted the tolerance of the
Sasanian ruling elite and of Khusrau’s own family. It is possible that
Herakleios stimulated the process by sending him a letter offering peace
for propaganda purposes, which Khusrau supposedly rejected: “I am
pursuing you as I hasten towards peace. For it is not of my free will that
406
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 422 ---
I am burning Persia, but constrained by you. Let us therefore throw
down our arms even now and embrace peace. Let us extinguish the ﬁre
before it consumes everything.” Theophanes continues: “But Chosroes
did not accept these proposals, and so the hatred of the Persian people
grew against him.”33
Instead Khusaru mobilized his last “retainers, noblemen and servants,”
sending these palace nonﬁghters to ﬁght the highly experienced veterans
of Herakleios. It was a last throw of the dice. On February 23, 628, ac-
cording to Theophanes, when Herakleios seemed to be on the verge of
entering Ctesiphon and ﬁnishing off the empire, Khusrau was over-
thrown and killed in a coup d’état by his own son Kawadh-Siroy, who
opened peace negotiations and offered a prisoner exchange.
What ensued was not a capitulation but a negotiation—there were
still large Sasanian armies in the ﬁeld whose return could have tipped
the balance. Instead of entering Ctsesiphon—at some thirty square kilo-
meters, its sheer size was probably intimidating for his small army—
Herakleios moved more than three hundred miles northeast, returning
to the familiar terrain of Takht-i-Suleiman (now Ganzak) in the foothills
of the Zagros Mountains in April 628.34
That did not stop the deadly sequence of palace politics in
Ctesiphon—if one man could seize the throne, why not another?
Kawadh-Siroy was himself overthrown by Shahrbaraz in a military coup
d’état—he being the same ﬁeld commander with whom Herakleios had
talked more than once in the past. Shahrbaraz duly started negotiat-
ing for terms, eventually reaching an agreement. All the lost provinces,
from Egypt to Syria and Anatolia’s Cilicia, were returned to Byzantine
rule, but the Sasanians seemingly kept their very ﬁrst conquests on their
side of the river—actually reconquests for them, because those had ear-
lier been Sasanian territories.35
As the inheritor of an imperial culture already ancient with experi-
ence, Shahrbaraz knew how to negotiate: conversion to Christianity
was part of his package of concessions—a conversion of course soon re-
voked.
Herakleios had risen to power when the empire was in immediate
danger of being extinguished by Khusrau’s invasions, which reached
much deeper than any Sasanian invasion of the previous four centuries
of intermittent warfare, and by the Avar offensives that directly at-
tacked Constantinople in the summer of 626. He did not have the mili-
tary strength that would have been needed to drive back the Sasanian
Persians or the Avars with their camp followers, let alone both. He had
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
• 407

--- PDF PAGE 423 ---
just enough strength both on land and at sea simply to resist them at the
very walls of the city, and on the waters just in front of it—not to restore
an empire submerged by enemy forces. It is not a wild exaggeration to
say that July 626 could have been May 1453, as the beleaguered defend-
ers of Constantinople awaited the end.
The solution devised by Herakleios combined diplomacy and sub-
version (within both enemy camps) with a high-risk, relational maneu-
ver on a theater-wide scale—an historical rarity in itself. What was “re-
lational” about it, and very proﬁtably too, was that successive seasonal
raids by Herakleios had habituated Khusrau and his advisors to ex-
pect bold, deep, but ultimately inconclusive raids that would last a few
months till winter, and would leave the strategic situation unchanged.
Yes, the damage was sometimes painful, as with the destruction of the
Zoroastrian temple at Takht-I-Suleiman, a real blow to the prestige of
Khusrau and his dynasty. It claimed priestly authority—it was named
after Sasan or Sassan, great priest of the Temple of Anahita and grand-
father of Ardashir the founder—and its rulers were consecrate before
that same “royal” ﬁre of Adur Gushnasp.
But Khusrau evidently decided that even very damaging raids did
not justify the cost of the only fully reliable remedy, which was to with-
draw Sasanian forces from the newly conquered lands of Syria and
Egypt, to instead guard the old borders of the empire and its core terri-
tory in Mesopotamia. It would have meant abandoning Khusrau’s great
achievement—his unprecedented conquests of Byzantine territories.
In essence, in the crucial year 627 the Sasanians did not withdraw
from the west because they were sure that once his raiding was done,
Herakleios would again withdraw from the east. He did not, and the re-
sult was the end of a dynasty and an empire that had endured over four
centuries.
What happened next was the loss of the Levant, Egypt, and eventu-
ally North Africa to the Muslim conquest, but that scarcely nulliﬁed
the epic victory of Herakleios, because it was the empire itself that
Khusrau had wanted, and had claimed as the avenger of his benefactor
Maurikios, and not just the lands lost and regained only to be lost
again.
As the empire entered its most miserable years, in the gloom there still
shined the bright memory of what had been accomplished by the expe-
ditionary army of Herakleios. For that we have the testimony of our
major source, Theophanes, who died in 818: it is evident from his prose
that the memory of those glorious events had remained undimmed by
the passage of two centuries.
408
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PDF PAGE 424 ---
Conclusion: Grand Strategy and the
Byzantine “Operational Code”
All states have a grand strategy, whether they know it or not. That is in-
evitable because grand strategy is simply the level at which knowledge
and persuasion, or in modern terms intelligence and diplomacy, interact
with military strength to determine outcomes in a world of other states,
with their own “grand strategies.”
All states must have a grand strategy, but not all grand strategies are
equal. There is coherence and effectiveness when persuasion and force
are each well guided by accurate intelligence, and then combine syner-
gistically to generate maximum power from the available resources.
More often, perhaps, there is incoherence so that the fruits of persua-
sion are undone by misguided force, or the hard-won results of force are
spoiled by clumsy diplomacy that antagonizes neutrals, emboldens ene-
mies, and disheartens allies.
The Byzantines had no central planning staffs to produce documents
in the modern manner, including the recent innovation of formal state-
ments of “national strategy” that attempt to deﬁne “interests,” the means
to protect and enhance them, and the alignment of the two in rational
or at least rationalized terms. The Byzantines never called it that—even
“strategy” is only a Greek-sounding word not used by ancient or Byz-
antine Greeks. But they assuredly had a grand strategy, even if it was
never stated explicitly—that is a very modern and indeed rather dubious
habit—but certainly it was applied so repetitively that one may even ex-
tract a Byzantine “operational code.”
First, however, two matters must be deﬁned: the identity of the pro-

--- PDF PAGE 425 ---
tagonists and the nature of strategy, or rather of the paradoxical logic of
strategy.
Identity
The Byzantine ruling elite faced the outside world and its unending dan-
gers with a strategic advantage that was neither diplomatic nor military
but instead psychological: the powerful moral reassurance of a triple
identity that was more intensely Christian than most modern minds can
easily imagine, and speciﬁcally Chalcedonian in doctrine; Hellenic in its
culture, joyously possessing pagan Homer, agnostic Thucydides, and ir-
reverent poets—though Hellene was a word long avoided, for it meant
pagan; and proudly Roman as the Romaioi, the living Romans, not
without justiﬁcation for Roman institutions long endured, at least sym-
bolically.1
But until the Muslim conquest took away the Levant and Egypt from
the empire, this triple identity was also a source of local disaffection
from the ruling Constantinopolitan elite, for of the three only the Ro-
man identity was universally accepted.
To begin with, the speakers of Western Aramaic and Coptic, who ac-
counted for most of the population of Syria and Egypt, including the
Jews in their land and beyond it, did not partake in the Hellenic cul-
ture—except for their own secular elites, which were organically part of
the Byzantine regime and were indeed often attacked by nativists as
“Hellenizers.” For the rest, the masses either did not know that Homer
ever lived, or were easily led by unlettered fanatical priests to vehe-
mently hate what they were too ignorant to enjoy.
Moreover, the zone that rejected Hellenism, as it had rejected the Ro-
man habit of bathing as too sensual, also rejected the excessively intel-
lectual Chalcedonian deﬁnition of the dual nature of Christ, both hu-
man and divine, insisting on the more purely monotheistic conception
of the single, divine nature of Christ.
That is the Monophysite creed still upheld by the Christians of the
Coptic churches of Egypt and Syria, the Orthodox churches of Ethiopia
and Eritrea, the Jacobite and Malankara Orthodox churches of India,
and in much more nuanced fashion by the Armenian Orthodox Apos-
tolic Church. In these ecumenical days, Orthodox Christians are no
longer deeply committed to their sides of the Chalcedonian dispute, but
the Byzantine empire of the sixth and seventh centuries was dangerously
divided by the Chalcedonian persecution on one side and, on the other,
410
• Conclusion

--- PDF PAGE 426 ---
Map 13. The empire in 565, 1025, and 1360

--- PDF PAGE 427 ---
by Monophysite vehemence, which rejected all imperial attempts at
doctrinal compromise, notably the monoenergism and monotheletism
of Herakleios.
None of this should have diminished the willingness of Monophysite
Christians to ﬁght for the empire against non-Christians, but it did, and
for good reasons: most non-Christians who attacked the empire were
not doctrinally anti-Christian, and several pagan enemies converted
to Christianity, notably the Bulghars, Magyars, Kievan Rus’, Serbs, and
Croats; the doctrinally anti-Christian Muslims, on the other hand, were
as purely monotheistic as the Jews, and more so than the Chalce-
donians.
The Muslim conquest saved the empire from these deep divisions by
cutting away its most vehement dissidents. It was by no means linguisti-
cally homogeneous even after that—there were many Armenian-speak-
ers in the east, and many Slav-speakers in the west, while in between
there long survived autochthonous languages, such as the Thracian, or
Bessic, spoken within sight of the Theodosian Wall and recorded among
monks within them. But none of that interfered with participation in the
Hellenic culture for those who wanted it, and a different original lan-
guage comported none of the divisiveness of the doctrinal fracture. It
might be said, therefore, that the loss of Syria and Egypt, unlike Latin-
speaking and Chalcedonian North Africa, was a mixed curse for the
empire: it brought the blessing of religious harmony, and increased cul-
tural unity.
The Muslim onslaught found a very large but disunited empire that
might have disintegrated entirely, given a little more bad luck, and left a
smaller, much poorer, but more united empire hardened to successfully
withstand six centuries of wars. (There are sound reasons not to abuse
the word crusade to describe Byzantine warfare, yet it had a holy war
dimension, certainly on the frontier as described in De Velitatione.)
This too is an explanation for the immense resilience of the imperial
ruling class in times of acute crisis, and during agonizingly protracted
periods of extreme insecurity: when all seemed bleak and hopeless, the
Christian faith, the culture of ancient Greece, and Roman pride com-
bined to reject surrender and inspire tenacity.2
The Logic of Strategy
“Strategy” is one of those Greek words that the Greeks never knew, for
the pan-Western word strategy (strategie, strategia, etc.) derives from
412
• Conclusion

--- PDF PAGE 428 ---
strategos, often mistranslated as “general,” but in historical fact a com-
bined politico-military chief, and thus a better source-word for an activ-
ity that is equally broad. The logic of strategy is not quite so simple.
“Men do not understand . . . [the coincidence of opposites]: there is a
‘back-stretched connection’ like that of the bow.”3 Thus Herakleitos or
Heraclitus of Ephesus, thought very obscure by the ancients, but for us
entirely transparent after the experience of the paradoxes of nuclear de-
terrence, whereby the peaceful had to be constantly ready to attack in
retaliation, aggressors had to be meekly prudent, and nuclear weapons
could be useful only if they were not used. Deterrence unveiled for all to
see the paradoxical logic of strategy with its apparent contradictions,
turning the “back-stretched” connection that unites opposites into a
commonplace, except for those incurable innocents who fail to see that
safety could be the sturdy child of terror.
With that, Herakleitos, the ﬁrst Western strategic thinker (“War is the
father of all and king of all and so he renders some gods, others men, he
makes some slaves, others free”4), was ﬁnally vindicated, though long
before him many a cunning ﬁghter had won by instinctively applying
the paradoxical logic to surprise his enemy, a thing possible only when
the better ways of ﬁghting, hence the expected ways, are deliberately
renounced. When a reacting enemy is present, the straightest and broad-
est and best-paved highway is the worst road upon which to attack an
enemy, because it is the best road, while a bad road could be good. It is
by that same logic in dynamic action and reaction that the victories of
an advancing army can bring defeat once they exceed the culminating
point of success, indeed victory becomes defeat by the prosaic workings
of overextension. Likewise, warfare itself can yield peace by burning
out the strength and the will to continue ﬁghting.
Indeed, all that is formed and forged in the crucible of conﬂict eventu-
ally turns into its opposite, if only it persists long enough, a dynamic
version of the coincidentia oppositorum of Nicola de Cusa or Nikolaus
von Kues. It is not necessary to be philosophically inclined to apprehend
the logic, nor does one need to know of its existence in order to apply
it—but none that ever built an empire in war as the Romans did, or pre-
served one over the centuries as the East Romans did, could do so but
by obeying the logic. It starts with the simple, static contradiction of si
vis pacem para bellum (if you want peace, prepare war) and proceeds to
dynamic contradictions: if you defend every foot of a perimeter, you are
not defending the perimeter; if you win too completely, destroying the
enemy, you make way for another; and so on.
Grand Strategy and the Byzantine “Operational Code”
• 413

--- PDF PAGE 429 ---
The only additional complication is that conﬂict unfolds at separate
levels—grand strategic, theater-strategic, operational, tactical—which
interpenetrate downward much more easily than upward. To cite a
modern example, Adolf Hitler’s choice of the wrong allies and the wrong
enemies at the level of grand strategy—he had Italy and Japan with
him, America, Russia, and the British empire against him—could not be
overcome by the many German tactical, operational, and even theater-
level victories, notably over France in 1940; and the ﬁnal outcome could
not have been changed by even larger battleﬁeld victories. Had the D-
Day landings been repulsed, Germany would still have lost the war, it is
only that the ﬁrst target of the ﬁssion bomb would have been Berlin in-
stead of Hiroshima. And even if there had been no ﬁssion bomb, Ameri-
cans, Russians, and the British empire would still have won the war in a
few more years. Tactical brilliance, operational ingenuity, even theater-
level victories cannot outweigh a defective grand strategy, while by con-
trast a coherent grand strategy requires only mere adequacy in theater
strategy, operational methods, and tactics.
Given overwhelming superiority, material or moral or any combina-
tion thereof, wars can be won and peace kept without need of strategy.
Antagonists too weak to react signiﬁcantly are, in effect, mere objects.
War may still present huge difﬁculties, for reasons of distance, terrain,
and so forth. But to overcome physical problems, it is not the paradoxi-
cal logic of strategy that is wanted but rather the “linear” logic of sound
common sense and functional procedures.
Hence it is those ﬁghting against the odds, the outnumbered, the be-
leaguered, and overambitious gamblers, who have tried to exploit the
logic of strategy to the fullest, accepting the resulting risks—sometimes
achieving victories disproportionate to their resources, sometimes col-
lapsing ignominiously. Naturally, therefore, more often than not, the
great names of strategy—Napoleon, most notably—ultimately failed.
Herakleitos succeeded, as we saw, the ingenuous Belisarios ultimately
did not; but most Byzantine commanders, while admiring both, pre-
ferred the prudent ways illustrated in the manuals, in which the para-
doxical logic was exploited—but only up to the limit of risks prudently
acceptable. We have seen how preoccupied the Byzantines were with the
need to maximize every possible tactical and operational advantage,
while studiously trying not to depend on military strength any more
than they had to.
In all their inﬁnite variety, grand strategies can be compared by the
extent of their reliance on costly force, as opposed to the leveraging of
414
• Conclusion

--- PDF PAGE 430 ---
potential force by diplomacy (“armed suasion”), inducements (subsi-
dies, gifts, honors), and deception and propaganda. The lesser the ac-
tual force content, the greater the possibility of transcending the mate-
rial balance of strength, to achieve more with less. The Byzantines had
many precursors in this, but they became and perhaps remain the unsur-
passed masters. Before his death while retreating from a foolhardy at-
tempt to invade India, Alexander had already earned millennial glory by
conquering Achaemenid Iran, the only superpower for the Greeks. His
grand strategy certainly conformed to the paradoxical logic: while his
tactics were “hard”—frontal attacks by the infantry phalanx, and all-
out cavalry charges—Alexander’s diplomacy was “soft” and inclusive,
as symbolized by the encouragement of Macedonian-Iranian marriages,
to win over Achaemenid satraps and vassal peoples. Only the attempt to
extend his invention of consensual empire to India overshot his culmi-
nating point of success, for there was still an original Macedonian base
in his military strength, and it was by then excessively diluted.
As we have seen, the East Roman empire by us called Byzantine
was least Roman in its strategy, certainly after Justinian’s attempt at
total reconquest. Successively threatened from the east by Sasanian Per-
sia, the Muslim Arabs, and ﬁnally the Seljuk and Ottoman Turks, and
from the north by waves of steppe invaders, the Huns, Avars, Bulghars,
Pechenegs, Magyars, and Cumans, and from the west too by the ninth
century, the Byzantines could not hope to subdue or annihilate all com-
ers in the classic Roman manner.
To wear out their own forces, chieﬂy of expensive cavalry, in order to
utterly destroy the immediate enemy would only open the way for the
next wave of invaders. The genius of Byzantine grand strategy was to
turn the very multiplicity of enemies to advantage, by employing diplo-
macy, deception, payoffs, and religious conversion to induce them to
ﬁght one another instead of ﬁghting the empire. Only their ﬁrm self-im-
age as the only defenders of the only true faith preserved their moral
equilibrium. In the Byzantine scheme of things, military strength was
subordinated to diplomacy instead of the other way around, and used
mostly to contain, punish, or intimidate rather than to attack or defend
in full force.
The Byzantine “Operational Code”
It was an attractive Byzantine habit to convey what would now be called
“methodology” in the direct form of brisk injunctions or even avuncu-
Grand Strategy and the Byzantine “Operational Code”
• 415

--- PDF PAGE 431 ---
lar advice—do this, do not do that, require fewer and less cumbersome
phrases than third-person hortatory language. That is the format I use
below to deﬁne most succinctly the essential norms of Byzantine strate-
gic culture. They are nowhere stated in any Byzantine source as compre-
hensively as in what follows, but can be imputed legitimately on the ba-
sis of observed behavior, as well as the diverse recommendations of the
Byzantine guidebooks and ﬁeld manuals here examined. A normative
summary that minimizes duplication is one way of deﬁning an opera-
tional code.5
I. Avoid war by every possible means in all possible circumstances, but
always act as if it might start at any time. Train both individual recruits
and complete formations intensively, exercise units against each other,
prepare weapons and supplies to be ready for battle at all times—but do
not be eager to ﬁght.
The highest purpose of maximum combat readiness is to increase the
probability of not having to ﬁght at all.
II. Gather intelligence on the enemy and his mentality, and monitor his
movements continuously. Patrols and reconnaissance probes by light
cavalry units are always necessary, but not sufﬁcient. Spies are needed
inside enemy territory to provide early warning of war threats, or at
least to report preparations for war, and help divine enemy intentions.
In between reconnaissance by combat units and espionage in civilian
garb, the middle layer of intelligence gathering is often the most produc-
tive: clandestine (= hidden in nature) scouting, that is, passive observa-
tion and reporting. Efforts to scout and prevent enemy scouting are sel-
dom wasted.
III. Campaign vigorously, both offensively and defensively, but attack
mostly with small units; emphasize patrolling, raiding, and skirmishing
rather than all-out attacks. Avoid battle, and especially large-scale bat-
tle, except in very favorable circumstances—and even then avoid it if
possible, unless the enemy has somehow fallen into a condition of com-
plete inferiority, as in the case of a ﬂeet badly damaged by storms.
IV. Replace the battle of attrition with the “nonbattle” of maneuver. On
the defensive, do not confront greatly superior forces; instead keep close
to invading armies, remaining just beyond their reach, to quickly pounce
on outnumbered detachments, baggage trains, and looting parties. Pre-
416
• Conclusion

--- PDF PAGE 432 ---
pare ambushes large and small in the path of enemy forces, and lure
them into ambushes by feigned retreats. On the offensive, mount raids
or, better, probes that withdraw promptly if they encounter stiff resis-
tance. Rely on constant activity, even if each action is small in scale, to
demoralize and materially weaken the enemy over time.
V. Strive to end wars successfully by recruiting allies to change the over-
all balance of power. Diplomacy is therefore even more important in
war than at peace—not for the Byzantines the foolish aphorism that
when the guns speak, diplomats fall silent. In recruiting allies to attack
the enemy, his allies are the most useful recruits because they are nearest
and know best how to ﬁght the enemy’s forces. Enemy commanders suc-
cessfully subverted to serve the imperial interest are even better allies,
and the best of all might be found at the enemy’s court, or within his
family. But even peripheral allies that can only help a little are to be re-
cruited if at all possible.
VI. Subversion is the best path to victory. It is so cheap as compared to
the costs and risks of battle that it must always be attempted, even with
the most unpromising targets infused with hostility or religious ardor.
When facing an imminent jihadi offensive, the strategos is advised to be-
friend the emirs of the frontier castles, sending them “gift baskets.”6 No
exception was to be made for known fanatics: by the tenth century, the
Byzantines had certainly discovered that religious fanatics can also be
bribed, and indeed often more easily—they are creative in inventing reli-
gious justiﬁcations for taking bribes (“the ultimate victory of Islam is in-
evitable anyway . . .”).
VII. When diplomacy and subversion are not enough and there must be
ﬁghting, it should done with “relational” operational methods and tac-
tics that circumvent the most pronounced enemy strengths and exploit
enemy weaknesses. To avoid consuming the major combat forces, it
may be necessary to patiently whittle down the enemy’s moral and ma-
terial strength. That may require much time. But there is no urgency be-
cause as soon as one enemy is no more, another will surely take his
place for all is constantly changing as rulers and nations rise and fall.
Only the empire is eternal.
Note: The operational code outlined here allows for no historical evolu-
tion. Having claimed at the start that the construct here called “Byzan-
Grand Strategy and the Byzantine “Operational Code”
• 417

--- PDF PAGE 433 ---
tine strategy” was invented during the ﬁfth century in response to the
speciﬁc circumstances of the time, I recognize that the very different cir-
cumstances of subsequent centuries left their marks on Byzantine strat-
egy. After all, the Byzantines learned from experience as well as any of
us: they did make the same mistake twice or three times or four times,
but after that they were unlikely to repeat the same mistake again, or
not in the same way at any rate. It is a lesser claim that is here ad-
vanced—that there was enough continuity to deﬁne an “operational
code,” and in thus conﬂating eight centuries I am reassured by eminent
predecessors.7
418
• Conclusion

--- PDF PAGE 434 ---
Appendix
Emperors from Constantine I to Constantine XI
Glossary
Notes
Works Cited
Index of Names
General Index

--- PDF PAGE 435 ---

--- PDF PAGE 436 ---
Appendix: Was Strategy Feasible
in Byzantine Times?
An earlier book of mine, which has continued to attract inordinate
attention, was both praised and criticized for attributing a grand strat-
egy to the Romans of the ﬁrst three centuries CE.1 Noting the absence of
military or civil planning staffs, and of such elementary requirements
as accurate maps, some challenged the entire notion that the Romans
could think strategically at all, or even deﬁne their frontiers coherently.2
At least the lack of accurate maps was no great obstacle: large-scale sur-
vey techniques were in habitual use, while itineraries could be quite ac-
curate—there were even distance-measuring machines.3
As for the much larger question of the feasibility of strategy in Roman
and Byzantine times, the argument rests on how strategy is deﬁned. The
skeptics evidently see it as an essentially modern and bureaucratic activ-
ity, the result of explicit calculations and systematic decisions, destined
for equally systematic application. Their insistence on the importance
of geographic knowledge even suggests a confusion between strategy
and the discredited pseudo-science of Hausoferian “geopolitics.”4 I hold
that strategy is not about moving armies, as in board games, but rather
comprehends the entire struggle of adversarial forces, which need not
have a spatial dimension at all, as with the eternal competition between
weapons and countermeasures. Indeed, the spatial dimension of strat-
egy is rather marginal these days, and in some ways it always was.
It is the struggle of adversarial forces that generates the paradoxical

--- PDF PAGE 437 ---
logic of strategy, which is diametrically opposed to the commonsense
linear logic of everyday life. In strategy, contradictions are pervasive:
bad roads are good because their use is unexpected, victories are trans-
formed into defeats by overextension, and much more of the same.
Hence strategy is not transparent and never was, but it always deter-
mines outcomes, whether men know of its existence or not.5 Non-
practitioners, by contrast, seem to accept the comforting ofﬁcial version
that presents strategy as a form of systematic group thinking guided by
rational choices, which reﬂect a set of “national interests,” whose re-
sults are then itemized in ofﬁcial documents. It is true that decisions
driven by the paradoxical logic, shaped by the culture, and motivated
by the urges of power are nowadays rationalized in that way, but that
is all.
Nor is strategic practice the mere application of techniques that could
be applied anywhere and by anyone—it is always the expression of an
entire culture. Accordingly, in this book I have tried to evoke the strate-
gic culture of Byzantium—which I believe is in part applicable even to-
day, or perhaps especially today.
422
• Appendix

--- PDF PAGE 438 ---
Emperors from Constantine I
to Constantine XI
305–311
Constantine I Galerius, Licinius, Maximinus Daia
311–324
Constantine I and Licinius
324–337
Constantine I
337–340
Constantine II, Constantius II, and Constans
340–361
Constantius II
361–363
Julian
363–364
Jovian
364–375
Valentinian I and Valens
375–378
Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian II
378–395
Theodosius I
378–383
Theodosius I with Gratian and Valentinian II
383–392
Theodosius I with Valentinian II and Arkadios
392–395
Theodosius I with Arkadios and Honorius
The Western Empire
395–423
Honorius
425–455
Valentinian III
455
Petronius Maximus
455–456
Avitus
457–461
Majorian
461–465
Libius Severus
467–472
Anthimus
472
Olybrius
473–474
Glyceruis

--- PDF PAGE 439 ---
474–475
Julius Nepos
475–476
Romulus Augustulus
The Eastern Empire
395–408
Arkadios
408–450
Theodosios II
450–457
Marcian
457–474
Leo I
473–474
Leo II
474–491
Zeno
491–518
Anastasios I
518–527
Justin
527–565
Justinian I
565–578
Justin II
578–582
Tiberios II
582–602
Maurikios
602–610
Phokas
610–641
Herakleios
641–668
Constans II
668–685
Constantine IV
685–695
Justinian II (banished)
695–698
Leontios
698–705
Tiberios III
705–711
Justinian II (restored)
711–713
Bardanes
713–716
Anastasios II
716–717
Theodosios III
717–741
Leo III
741–775
Constantine V
775–780
Leo IV
780–797
Constantine VI
797–802
Irene
802–811
Nikephoros I
811
Straurakios
811–813
Michael I
813–820
Leo V
820–829
Michael II
829–842
Theophilos
842–867
Michael III
867–886
Basil I
886–912
Leo VI
913
Leo VI and Alexander
919–944
Romanos I Lekapenos
945–959
Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos
424
• Emperors from Constantine I to Constantine XI

--- PDF PAGE 440 ---
959–963
Romanos II
963–1025
Basil II and Constantine VIII
963
Regency of Theophano
963–969
Nikephoros II Phokas
969–976
John Tzimiskes
1025–1028
Constantine VIII (alone)
1028–1034
Romanos II Argyros
1034–1041
Michael IV
1041–1042
Michael V
1042
Zoe and Theodora
1042–1055
Constantine IX Monomakhos
1055–1056
Theodora (alone)
1056–1057
Michael VI Bringas
1057–1059
Isaac I Komnenos
1059–1067
Constantine X Doukas
1067–1071
Romanos IV Diogenes
1071–1078
Michael VII Doukas
1078–1081
Nikephoros III Botaniates
1081–1118
Alexios I Komnenos
1118–1143
John II Komnenos
1143–1180
Manuel I
1180–1183
Alexios II
1183–1185
Andronikos I
1185–1195
Isaac II
1195–1203
Alexios II
1203–1204
Isaac II with Alexios IV
1204
Alexios V Doukas Mourtzouphlos
April 13, 1204
Fall of Constantinople
Lascarid Dynasty in Nicea
1204–1222
Theodore I Lascaris
1222–1254
John III Doukas Vatatzes
1254–1258
Theodore II Laskaris
1258–1261
John IV Laskaris
1261
Recovery of Constantinople
1259–1282
Michael VIII Palaiologos
1282–1328
Andronikos II
1328–1341
Andronikos III
1341–1376
John V Palaiologos
1347–1354
John V Palaiologos with John VI Kantakouzenos
1341–1354
John VI
Emperors from Constantine I to Constantine XI
• 425

--- PDF PAGE 441 ---
1376–1379
Andronikos IV
1379–1391
John V (restored)
1390
John VII
1391–1425
Manuel II
1425–1448
John VIII
1449–1453
Constantine XI Dragases
May 29, 1453
Fall of Constantinople
426
• Emperors from Constantine I to Constantine XI

--- PDF PAGE 442 ---
Glossary
AG = Ancient Greek term in continued literary use; L = Latin
Agarenoi
Hagarenoi (from Abraham’s concubine Agar) Muslim Arabs
agens in rebus
Junior ofﬁcial, sometimes a messenger, not an “agent”
akontion
Javelin, throwing spear (AG)
akontistès
Javeliner (AG)
akritas
Frontier warrior, raider, scout, robber
akropolis
The high point and citadel of a city (AG)
ala, alae
Auxiliary cavalry unit(s) (L)
Alania
Caucasian region partly in modern Georgia (Ossetia)
Alans
Mounted warriors of Iranic origins
Albania
Caucasian region, mostly in modern Azerbaijan
Anatolia
Asia Minor; within modern Asiatic Turkey
Anatolikoi
Byzantine theme
Antae, Antes
Probably Slavs, moved west from Pontic steppe with Avars
anthypatos
Title in ninth to twelfth centuries, not a functional position
Arab
Until the twentieth century: a Bedouin, a nomad
Arabitai
Bedouin light horsemen, raiders, skirmishers, robbers
archon
Generic “ruler,” from classical term for high city ofﬁcial (AG)
Arian
Believer in the doctrine of the earthly substance of Christ
arithmos
Translation of numerus, a unit; also used for the tagma of the Vigla
Armenia
Caucasian region with expansive boundaries
Armeniakon
Byzantine theme; attested 667; located in eastern Anatolia

--- PDF PAGE 443 ---
a sekretis
A secretis, an imperial secretary
Asia
Roman province in western Anatolia
Athinganoi
Judaizing sect, especially in Phrygia
augustus
Greek: “Sebastos”; ruling emperor with or without co-emperors
autocephalous
“Self-headed”; the patriarchal sees of the Orthodox Church
autokrator
The emperor was basileus kai autokrator (= Latin imperator)
ballista
Torsion-powered artillery
bandon
From the German, a unit—in the Strategikon, of three hundred
brachialion
Defensive outerwork beyond the main wall
boukellarios
A soldier, originally in the personal service of a commander
caesar/kaisar
Title reserved for an emperor’s son
caliph
Khalifa, placeholder, deputy for the dead prophet Muhammad
caltrop
Multispike object much used to impede cavalry
candidatus
Member of the imperial bodyguard
Cappadocia
Region of central Anatolia, mostly rather arid
carat
One twenty-fourth of a solidus or nomisma
Chalcedonian
Believer in the twin-nature doctrine of the Council of 451
cheiromanganon
Arrow-launching artillery
chelandion
Originally a horse-transport ship; later a transport
chiliarchy
Unit of a thousand
chrysobull
Document sealed with the emperor’s gold seal, a decree
Cibyrrhaeotai
Kibyrrhaeotai, coastal theme in southwest Anatolia
codex
A bound book of pages, as opposed to a scroll
cohors
Auxiliary infantry unit; pl., cohortes
come/komes
Literally: “companion” (of the emperor) ﬁeld-grade ofﬁcer
consulate
One-year magistracy; after 541 reserved for emperors
defensores
Heavy infantry employed in close ranks to hold ground
dekarch
Junior ofﬁcer in charge of ten soldiers
domestikos
Very high rank, civil or more often military
domestikos ton scholon
Commander of imperial guard units (L.: scholae)
doration
Throwing spear, javelin (AG)
doukatores
Scouts, from Latin, those who lead the way
doux
Latin dux; a commander, originally provincial, later lower
dromon
Warship with a ﬁghting deck over the hull; pl. dromones
dromos
The imperial horse-relay post
droungarios
Army or naval commander
428
• Glossary

--- PDF PAGE 444 ---
droungarios tou ploimou
Commander of the Constantinople ﬂeet
dualist
Believer in the conﬂict between good and evil deities
ektaxis
Battle array (AG)
eparchos
City prefect, responsible for public order
epilorikion
Light overcoat of cotton or silk worn over armor
exarchos
Plenipotentiary (viceroy); in Carthage and Ravenna
exkoubita
“Outside the bedchamber” palace guard unit
federati
Originally barbarian troops; a unit in the Anatolikoi theme
gastald
Lombard city governor
gastraphetès
“Belly bow,” a large bow with reloader, heavy crossbow (AG)
Genikon
Fiscal department under the logothetes tou genikou
gladius
The short legionary sword, for close-order ﬁghting
Golden Gate
Of the Theodosian Wall, where the Via Egnatia ended
Hagarene
Muslim, from Agar, Abraham’s concubine
hagia
Holy
Hebdomon
Suburb of Constantinople on the Sea of Marmara
hekatontarch
Ofﬁcer in charge of a hundred soldiers
hetaireia
Escort company, tagmatic palace unit
hikanatoi
Tagmatic palace unit
hippagogos
Horse-transport ship
hippotoxotès
Mounted archer (AG)
hoplitès
Infantryman with body armor and/or a heavy shield (AG)
hypatos
Greek: consul
hypostrategos
Literally “undergeneral,” senior military title
Iberia
Caucasian region within modern Georgia
icon
Literally, a “likeness,” a religious image
iconoclasm
Destruction of idolatrous images, eighth/ninth century
iconodule
Defender of the liturgical use of icons
indiction
Fiscal year, from September to August, in a ﬁfteen-year cycle
Isauria
Region in southwest Anatolia
Ishmaelite
Muslim Arab, from descendant of Ishmael, son of Hagar
Jacobite
Monophysite (Church, doctrine); after Jacob Baradaeus
kabadia
Thick felt tunic or leg drape worn for protection
kandidatos
Originally an imperial bodyguard, later a nonfunctional title
karabisianoi
Sailors or marines
katalogos
Muster list (AG)
Glossary
• 429

--- PDF PAGE 445 ---
kataphraktos
Armored cavalryman
katepano
From ninth century, civil or military ofﬁcial, later governor
khagan
Qagan, Turkic chief of chiefs (qans, or khans)
Khazars
Ruling people centered in north Caucasus, seventh to tenth centuries
kleisoura
Deﬁle or mountain pass; a command thereof
klibanion
Sleeveless cuirass of scale or lamellar armor
kontos
Thrusting spear, pike, or cavalry lance (AG)
kontoubernium
From Lat. contubernium; tent-group; unit of ten, synonym of
dekarchia
koubikoularios
Of the (imperial) bedchamber; senior eunuch
kouropalates
High title for imperial relatives and foreign princes: majordomo
laisa
Anti-arrow barrier or shelter made of intertwined vines or thin branches
lithobolos
Stone-thrower; artillery (AG)
liturgy
Designated duty, also in church services
logothetes
Ofﬁcial, originally ﬁscal; later, highest administrative rank
logothetes tou dromou
Originally of the post, later with many other duties
logothetes ton angelon
In charge of stables, herds, and remounts
lorikion
Mail vest or cuirass, other chest armor
Macedonia
Region between Epirus on the Adriatic and Thrace
Magaritai
Muslim warriors, Christian apostates
magister militum
Master of soldiers, highest military commander
magister militum per Armeniam
Commander of the forces in northeast
Anatolia
magister militum per Orientem
Commander of the forces facing and in Meso-
potamia
magister militum per Thracias
Commander of the forces in Thrace and beyond
magister militum praesentalis
Commander of the forces in or near Constanti-
nople, the imperial ﬁeld army
magister ofﬁciorum
Master of ofﬁces, head of the civil bureaucracy
magister utriusque militiae
Highest commander of both infantry and cavalry
menavlatos
Heavy elite infantryman, armed with a menavlion
menavlion
Pike
Manichean
Follower of the dualist Mani
Maronite
Levantine church in communion with Rome, Syriac liturgy
Melkite
Chalcedonian churches, both Orthodox and Catholic
meros
Formation of three moiras, six to seven thousand men in the Strategikon
milion
Constantinople milestone from which distances were measured
430
• Glossary

--- PDF PAGE 446 ---
milliaresion
Silver coin worth one-twelfth of a solidus or nomisma
minsouratores
From Lat. mensuratores; military surveyors
moira
Formation of three bandons, one to two thousand men in the
Strategikon
Monophysites
Believers in the single, divine nature of Christ; also “Jacobite”
and Copt
monotheletism
Christological compromise: one will in unspeciﬁed natures
naumachia
Sea battle, naval tactics (AG)
nomisma
Byzantine gold coin, successor to the solidus
Opsikion
Theme in central Anatolia, centered on Ancyra (Ankara)
Optimatoi
Theme in northwest Anatolia, centered on Nikomedeia (Kocaeli)
ourguia
Length measure, 1.8 meters
palatine
Of the palace; as with units of palace guards
parakoimomenos
Senior eunuch, head of the imperial bedchamber staff
patriarch
Of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem
patrikios, patricius
Very high rank, later diminished below anthypatos
Paulicians
A supposedly dualist, certainly anticlerical, heresy
pentekontarch
Infantry commander of ﬁfty
phoulkon
Or fulkon, Germanic, battle force, commander’s escort
phylarch
Tribal chief, mostly Arab, commander of auxiliaries
Pontic steppe
Inland from the northern shore of the Black Sea
Porphyrogennetos
“Born in the purple [bedchamber],” offspring of an em-
peror
praepositus sacri cubiculi
Overseer of the bedchamber; highest palace ofﬁcial
praipositos
Same in Greek, eunuch high ofﬁcial
proskynesis
Ritual full-length prostration before the emperor
prokoursatores
Light-horse scouts or skirmishers (Lat: forward runners)
protektor
Bodyguard; later under the domestikos ton scholon
protospatharios
Military rank; from the eighth century, high title with Senate
membership
Rhos, Rhosoi
Originally Scandinavian, later Slavic inhabitants of Rhosia,
Kievan Rus’
Saracen
Originally a Sinai tribe; from the seventh century, Arab Muslim; later,
any Muslim
sarissa
Long spear, basic weapon of the Macedonian phalanx (AG)
scholai
Originally Lat.: scholae palatinae; imperial guard units based in Con-
stantinople; tagmatic, full-time
Glossary
• 431

--- PDF PAGE 447 ---
Scythia
The Pontic steppe and beyond; late Roman province
spatharios
Lit. swordsman; an imperial bodyguard, later a title
sphendonè
A sling (AG)
spithame
Length measure, 23.4 centimeters
strategos
Commander; commander in chief of a theme
stratelates
High rank, Greek, for magister militum; later a title
stylite
Christian ascetic who lived on top of a pillar
tagma/tagmata
Cavalry formations, full-time, not thematic; elite units
taktika
Ofﬁcial lists of ofﬁces and titles, ninth and tenth centuries
tattoo
To array; to deploy (AG)
Tauroscythians
Originally inhabitants of Crimea; later of Kievan Rus’ (literary)
taxiarchos
Commander of a thousand
tetrarch
Commander of four soldiers; equivalent to a lieutenant corporal
thema/themata
Military/administrative districts garrisoned by part-time forces
toparches
Rulers of petty states
toporetes
Literally, lieutenant, deputy commander of a tagma
tourma
Large military unit; themes often had three
tribune
Commander of a bandon, equivalent to a comes, komes
tzerboulia
Heavy boots, for infantrymen
vexillation
Originally a legionary detachment; later an army formation
vigla
From Latin vigiles, the watch; tagmatic guard unit in Constantinople
Vizir
Of Iranian origin; the chief administrator of Muslim rulers
voivode
Southern Slav chief or “prince”
zabai
Segments of mail worn as supplementary armor
zupan/zoupan
Southern Slav ruler
432
• Glossary

--- PDF PAGE 448 ---
Notes
Abbreviations
Ammianus Marcellinus—Rolfe
Ammianus Marcellinus, 3 vols., trans. John C. Rolfe (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1935)
Anecdota (of Prokopios)
H. B. Dewing, ed. and trans., Procopius (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1969), vol. 6
Chronicon Paschale
Chronicon Paschale, 284–628 AD, trans. Michael Whitby and Mary Whitby
(Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1989)
De Cerimoniis (Book of Ceremonies)
Constantine Porphyrogennetos, De Cerimoniis Aulae Byzantinae, in J.
Reiske, ed., Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae (Bonn: Weber, 1829)
DAI
De Administrando Imperio, ed. Gy. Moravcsik, trans. R. J. H. Jenkins (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies / Harvard Uni-
versity, 1967)
DAI—Commentary
R. J. H. Jenkins, F. Dvornik, B. Lewis, Gy. Moravcsik, D. Obolensky, and S.
Runciman, eds., De Administrando Imperio, vol. 2: Commentary (London:
Athlone Press, 1962)
Getica
Jordanes, Getica: De origine actibusque Getarum; translated by Charles C.
Mierow as The Gothic History of Jordanes (Cambridge: Speculum Historiale,
1915); Latin text: http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/iordanes1.html.

--- PDF PAGE 449 ---
Marcellinus Comes
Marcellinus Comes, trans. Brian Coke, Byzantina Australiensia 7 (Sydney:
Australian Association for Byzantine Studies, 1995)
ODB
The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, ed. Alexander P. Kazhdan and Alice-
Mary Talbot with Anthony Cutler, Timothy E. Gregory, Nancy P. ŠevÓenko
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1991)
Sebeos
The Armenian History Attributed to Sebeos, trans. R. W. Thompson, vols. 1–
2 (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1999)
Strategikon—Dennis
George T. Dennis, Maurice’s Strategikon: Handbook of Byzantine Military
Strategy (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984)
Theodosian Code
http:ancientrome.ru/ius/library/codex/theod/liber16.htm8.
Theophanes
Theophanes, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, AD 284–813, trans.
Cyril A. Mango and Roger Scott with Geoffrey Greatrex (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1997)
I. The Invention of Byzantine Strategy
1. As vigorously argued by Bryan Ward-Perkins, The Fall of Rome and the
End of Civilization (2005). For the broader debate, see Guy Halsall, Bar-
barian Migrations and the Roman West, 376–568 (2007), pp. 17–18, 422–
447.
2. There were twenty-ﬁve to thirty legions of some 5,500 to 6,000 men each
with roughly as many auxiliary light infantry and cavalry, for a total of
some 275,000 to 360,000 men; there were also ﬂeets; H. M. D. Parker, The
Roman Legions (1928/1985). G. L. Chessman, The Auxilia of the Roman
Imperial Army (1914/1975).
3. Hugh Elton, Warfare in Roman Europe, A.D. 350–425 (1997), from
p. 199; Edward N. Luttwak, The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire:
From the First Century A.D. to the Third (2007), see the appendix on the
grand strategy and its critics.
4. See the surveys in Charalambos Papasotiriou, “Byzantine Grand Strategy”
(1991), from p. 93; Mark Whittow, The Making of Byzantium, 600–1025
(1996), pp. 15–37; and John H. Pryor, Geography, Technology and War:
Studies in the Maritime History of the Mediterranean, 646–1571 (1988),
pp. 1–24.
5. Ze’ev Rubin, “The Sasanid Monarchy” (2001), from p. 638; but in the same
he lists all the wars started by the Sasanians. See A. D. Lee, Information and
Frontiers: Roman Foreign Relations in Late Antiquity (1993), from p. 21.
434
• Notes to Pages 1–4

--- PDF PAGE 450 ---
6. From an inscription by Shapur I (240–270) cited in Touraj Daryaee, “Ethnic
and Territorial Boundaries in Late Antique and Early Medieval Persia
(Third to Tenth Century)” (2005), p. 131.
7. H. Grégoire, “Imperatoris Michaelis Palaeologi De vita sua” (1959–1960),
p. 462. Michele Amari in La Guerra del Vespro Siciliano (1851) discounted
the “supposed plots” of Giovanni da Procida, crediting local initiative in-
stead (p. 90). But I follow Steven Runciman, The Sicilian Vespers (1960),
pp. 226–227 (on p. 313 he gently rebukes the great Amari).
8. On the Romans’ lack of cartographic conceptions, see Pietro Janni, La
Mappa e Il periplo: Cartograﬁa antica e spazio odologico (1984).
9. See the discussion in Lee, Information and Frontiers, from p. 81. The Ro-
man army used itineraries: “itineraria prouinciarum,” N. P. Milner, trans.,
Vegetius: Epitome of Military Science (1996), III.6.
10. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 14, in The History of
Menander the Guardsman, trans. R. C. Blockley (1985), p. 175.
11. Michael F. Hendy, Studies in the Byzantium Monetary Economy, c. 300–
1450 (1985), from p. 157.
12. J. F. Haldon, Byzantium in the Seventh Century: The Transformation of
a Culture (1990), from p. 173; compare Salvatore Cosentino, “Dalla
tassazione tardoromana a quella bizantina: Un avvio al medioevo” (2007),
pp. 119–133.
13. Nicolas Oikonomides, “The Role of the Byzantine State in the Economy”
(2002), pp. 973–1058.
14. The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, A.D. 284–813, trans. Cyril Mango
et al. (1997), no. 303, AM 6113, pp. 435–436.
15. Jordanes, Getica (De origine actibusque Getarum), line 261; translated by
Charles C. Mierow as The Gothic History of Jordanes (1915), p. 126. The
Latin text can be found at www.thelatinlibrary.com/iordanes1.html.
16. The most elegant rendition remains Denis Van Berchem, L’armée de
Dioclétien et la réforme Constantinienne (1952).
17. For the broader context, see Fergus Millar, A Greek Roman Empire: Power
and Belief under Theodosius II (408–450) (2007).
18. HòuhànshÄ [Book of the Later Han], partial translation by John E. Hill at
http://depts.washington.edu/silkroad/texts/hhshu/hou_han_shu.html.
19. See the indispensable Peter B. Golden, Introduction to the History of the
Turkic Peoples: Ethnogenesis and State Formation in Medieval and Early
Modern Eurasia and the Middle East (1992), from p. 87. Professor Golden
(March 23, 2008) corrected my dismissal of the connection, referencing
Miklós Érdy, “Hun and Xiongnu Type Cauldron Finds throughout Eur-
asia” (1995), pp. 3–26; and Étienne de la Vaissière, “Huns et Xiongnu”
(2005), pp. 3–26.
20. Henry Yule and A. C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary of Colloquial
Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, ed. Rev. E. Crooke (1985), p. 947.
21. For a brief overview of the vast literature on ethnogenesis, see Halsall,
Barbarian Migrations, pp. 14–16, 457–470; Halsall concurs with Walter
Notes to Pages 4–15
• 435

--- PDF PAGE 451 ---
Pohl, as in (brieﬂy) Pohl’s “Conceptions of Ethnicity in Early Medieval
Studies” (1998), pp. 15ff. On the original concept of ethnogenesis, see Peter
B. Golden, “Ethnicity and State Formation in Pre-Cinggisid Turkic Eurasia”
(2001).
22. Otto J. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns (1973), from p. 386. He
also squashed Altheim’s speculations (p. 385 n. 82).
23. In Eutropium I, 250: “Taurorum claustra, paludes ﬂos Syriae seruit”; see
Averil Cameron Claudian, Poetry and Propaganda at the Court of Honorius
(1970), from p. 124.
24. Theodoret, bishop of Cyrrhus, Syria, 423–457; not seen by me; cited in
Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, pp. 58–59.
25. Golden, History of the Turkic Peoples, p. 108.
1. Attila and the Crisis of Empire
1. For a brief overview, see C. R. Whittaker, Frontiers of the Roman Empire
(1994), from p. 132.
2. Liber Pontiﬁcalis, 47.7, in Raymond Davis, trans., The Book of Pontiffs
(1989), p. 39; money changed hands.
3. Ambrosii, Expositio Evangelii secundum Lucam, X, 10; Migne, Patrologia
Latina, vol. 15, cols. 1806–1809.
4. Wulfhere sohte ic ond Wyrmhere . . .: From the Exeter Book, ca. 975. See
Kemp Malone, ed., Widsith(1936/1962), pp. 118–121.
5. Theodore M. Andersson, A Preface to the Nibelungenlied (1987).
6. E. A. Thompson, The Huns (1996), e.g.: “In material civilization [the Huns]
belonged to the Lower Stage of Pastoralism” (p. 47)—the capitalization
reveals the doctrine; Otto J. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns
(1973), p. 226. Peter Heather disagrees in his Fall of the Roman Empire
(2006), from p. 300.
7. XXX I.2.1., in Ammianus Marcellinus, trans. John C. Rolfe (1935) (hereaf-
ter cited as Ammianus Marcellinus–Rolfe), pp. 3:381.
8. Peri Ktismaton, De aediﬁcis, IV.v.1–7; translated by H. B. Dewing (with G.
Downey) as Buildings (1971), pp. 7:266–267.
9. Peter B. Golden, Introduction to the History of the Turkic Peoples: Ethno-
genesis and State Formation in Medieval and Early Modern Eurasia and the
Middle East (1992), p. 92.
10. The horses: “duris quidem sed deformibus” of Ammianus Marcellinus,
XXXI.2.6.
11. Ibid., XXXI.2.9, Ammianus Marcellinus–Rolfe, p. 385.
12. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, p. 240, cites many cases, in-
cluding Josephus, The Jewish War, VII.4, 249–250, on the near capture of
Tiridates I of Armenia by Alan warriors ca. 72 CE.
13. Panegyric on Anthemius, 266–269. In Sidonius, trans. W. B Anderson
(1963), p. 2:31.
14. Panegyric on Avitus, 236; Anderson, Sidonius, p. 139; Maenchen-Helfen
asserts that Sidonius was echoing Claudian, whose iacula were arrows.
436
• Notes to Pages 15–22

--- PDF PAGE 452 ---
15. Gad Rausing, The Bow (1967), from p. 140. I owe the hand-copied text to
the kindness of Hans and Marit Rausing.
16. Heather, Fall of the Roman Empire, p. 156, has 130 centimeters.
17. “This magniﬁcent instrument” etc.: E. W. Marsden, Greek and Roman Ar-
tillery (1969), pp. 8–10.
18. A German master craftsman, Markus Klek, has revealed the intricacies of
the manufacturing process by actually making a tendon and bone composite
bow; see http://www.primitiveways.com/pt-composite_bow.html.
19. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, p. 226.
20. Under “The Fall of Hervor and the Gathering of Angantyr’s Army,” pt. 14
of The Saga of Hervor and King Heidrek the Wise, trans. Peter Tunstall
(2005). http://www.northvegr.org/lore/oldheathen/018.php.
21. Homer, The Odyssey, bk. 24, 167–178, trans. A. T. Murray (1946),
p. 2:415.
22. As noted by Hans Rausing, personal communication, January 9, 2008.
23. Fred Isles, “Turkish Flight Arrows,” (1961). Online at http://www.atarn
.org/mongolian/mongol_1.htm.
24. http://www.hermitagemuseum.org/html_En/12/b2003/hm12_3_1_5.html.
For a contrary view, see Gongor Lhagvasuren, http://www.atarn.org/mon-
golian/mongol_1.htm.
25. McLeod, “The Range of the Ancient Bow,” (1965), p. 8; McLeod, “The
Range of the Ancient Bow: Addenda,” (1972), p. 80. On armor types, see
A. D. H. Bivar, “Cavalry Tactics and Equipment on the Euphrates” (1972),
p. 283.
26. Edward N. Luttwak, “The Operational Level of War,” (Winter 1980–
1981), pp. 61–79; Luttwak, Strategy (2001), from p. 112.
27. Ammianus Marcellinus–Rolfe, p. 383; XXXI.2.6: “verum equis prope
afﬁxi.”
28. Panegyric on Anthemius, 262–266, in Anderson, Sidonius, p. 31.
29. XXXI, 2, 8, in Ammianus Marcellinus–Rolfe, p. 385.
30. H. D. F. Kitto’s cheerfully nonliteral translation of 6 D 5W (“Thracian” for
Saian), in The Greeks (1951), p. 88; preceded by the invaluable “I hate a
woman thick about the ankles.”
31. John Haldon, Warfare, State and Society in the Byzantine World, 565–1204
(1999), pp. 163–165. On carts, see The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium
(1991), pp. 1:383–384, s.v. “Carts.”
32. Prokopios, Anecdota, bk. XXX, 4–7, in H. B. Dewing, ed. and trans.,
Procopius (1969), pp. 6:347–349.
33. Adapted from Adrian Keith Goldsworthy, The Roman Army at War, 100
BC–AD 200 (1996), p. 293, including table 5. More broadly, see John F.
Haldon, “The Organization and Support of an Expeditionary Force: Man-
power and Logistics in the Middle Byzantine Period” (2007), from p. 422;
and Haldon, “Introduction: Why Model Logistical Systems?” (2005), from
p. 6.
34. Donald R. Morris, The Washing of the Spears (1966), pp. 312–313, with
South African data on ox wagons (Goldsworthy’s data is from India). Per-
Notes to Pages 22–32
• 437

--- PDF PAGE 453 ---
sonal experience in tropical Bolivia (www.amazonranch.org) conﬁrms the
Morris data.
35. Haldon, Warfare, State and Society, p. 164.
36. War Department, Handbook on German Military Forces (1945/1990),
p. 297.
37. Strategikon of Maurikios (see Part III below), XII, 2.9.
38. De Velitatione; see Part III below.
39. See Jordanes, Getica, translated by Charles C. Mierow as The Gothic His-
tory of Jordanes (1915) (hereafter cited as Getica), XLII.221, p. 113, re-
garding the siege of Acquileia in 452. On speciﬁc engines at Naissus (Nish,
Serbia) in 447, see Priskos of Panium, 6.2, in R. C. Blockley, The Fragmen-
tary Classicizing Historians of the Later Roman Empire (1983), pp. 2:230–
233.
40. On the controverted chronology, see Constantine Zuckerman, “L’Empire
d’Orient et les Huns” (1994), pp. 165–168. But Maenchen-Helfen, The
World of the Huns, remains convincing (from p. 108) in aligning the evi-
dence on a sequence of conquests from 441 to 447; almost fully endorsed by
Blockley, Fragmentary Classicizing Historians (p. 1:168 n. 48).
41. Letter LXXVII, 8, “ad Oceanum de morte Fabiolae,” in Selected Letters of
St. Jerome, trans. F. A. Wright (1954), pp. 328–331.
42. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, pp. 57–58.
43. From the Liber Chalifarum (not seen by me) cited in Maenchen-Helfen, The
World of the Huns, p. 58.
44. Getica XXXV.180. The Visigoths ex Thervingi, or Vesi, were renamed by
Cassiodorus to obtain a matched pair with Ostrogoths. Translation from
pp. 101–102, adapted by author (“domain” for “tribes” etc).
45. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 3, lines 40–65, in
Blockley, Fragmentary Classicizing Historians, pp. 2:284–285.
46. Ibid., lines 373–378, in Blockley, Fragmentary Classicizing Historians,
pp. 2:264–265.
47. Ibid., lines 378–385, pp. 2:265–267. On the name, see Maenchen-Helfen,
The World of the Huns, pp. 388–389.
48. Thompson, The Huns, p. 226.
49. Excerpta de legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 5, lines 585–618, in
Blockley, Fragmentary Classicizing Historians, pp. 2:276–279.
50. That is, the prevailing interpretation of Priskos, who records traveling on
a “level road” over a plain and crossing the “navigable rivers” Drecon,
Tigas, and Tiphesas. In Jordanes (XXXIV, 178) they are “ingentia si quidem
ﬂumina, id est Tisia Tibisiaque et Dricca”; see Thompson, The Huns, ap-
pendix F, “The Site of Attila’s Headquarters,” pp. 276–277; compare Rob-
ert Browning, “Where Was Attila’s Camp?” (1953), pp. 143–145, who
places the camp across the lower Danube in Wallachia; but Blockley, Frag-
mentary Classicizing Historians (p. 2:384 n. 43), endorses Thompson.
51. [Flavius] Areobindos, future magister militum, Argagisklos = Arnegisklos.
52. The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, A.D. 284–813, trans. Cyril Mango
et al. (1997), no. 103, AM 5942, p. 159.
438
• Notes to Pages 32–41

--- PDF PAGE 454 ---
53. Constantine Zuckerman, “L’Empire d’Orient et le Huns” (1994), p. 169.
Zuckerman otherwise disputes Maenchen-Helfen’s chronology.
54. Fifteenth indiction, consulship of Ardabur and Calepius [Mommsen 447],
in Brian Coke, trans., The Chronicle of Marcellinus Comes (1995), p. 19
and p. 89 for 447.5.
55. See the discussion in Heather, Fall of the Roman Empire, from p. 334.
56. Eminent: J. B. Bury, no less, “Justa Grata Honoria,” 1919, pp. 1–13; curtly
dismissive: Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, p. 130; credulous:
Thompson, who builds much on it, The Huns, from p. 145; it is just juicy
court gossip for Heather, Fall of the Roman Empire, p. 335.
57. Getica XXXV.182, p. 102.
58. Sidonius, Carmina VII, Panegyric on Avitus, 319–330, in Anderson, Sidonius
(1963), pp. 1:145–147.
59. On the role of Aetius, see, most recently, Peter Heather, “The Western Em-
pire, 425–476” (2001), from p. 5. In this, the story of Honoria’s betrothal is
credited. See also A. H. M. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 284–602
(1973), pp. 1:176–177.
60. Getica XXXVI.191, p. 105.
61. Getica XL.212, p. 110.
62. Getica XLI.216, p. 111.
63. Thompson, The Huns, pp. 155, 156–157; Maenchen-Helfen, The World of
the Huns, p. 132, robustly disagreed.
64. Thompson’s chapter is entitled “The Defeats of Attila,” The Huns, p. 137.
65. Getica XLI.217, p. 112; Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, p. 132,
talks of very heavy losses among the Huns speciﬁcally—with no evidence, of
course.
66. Evidence from the acts of the Council (not seen by me) cited in Maenchen-
Helfen, The World of the Huns, p. 131 nn. 613–615.
67. Ammianus Marcellinus–Rolfe, XXI.11,2; and 12,1, p. 2:141.
68. Herodian, bk. 8, 4, 6–7; text from Edward C. Echols, trans., Herodian of
Antioch’s History of the Roman Empire (1961), pp. 203–204. Also at
www.Tertullian.Org/Fathers/Herodian_08_Book8.Htm.
69. Getica XLII.221, p. 113.
70. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, pp. 137–139; Thompson, The
Huns, p. 161—the class hatred he directs at Avienus, dead some nine hun-
dred years by 1948, is absurd and hilarious.
71. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns, p. 141; Thompson, The Huns,
pp. 161–163, is of the same view.
72. Getica XLIII.225, p. 114; Priskos, Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum
ad gentes, 6, in Blockley, Fragmentary Classicizing Historians, pp. 2:315–
317.
2. The Emergence of the New Strategy
1. For an overview, see A. D. Lee, “The Eastern Empire: Theodosius to
Anastasius” (2001), pp. 34ff.
Notes to Pages 41–49
• 439

--- PDF PAGE 455 ---
2. R. C. Blockley, East Roman Foreign Policy (1992), from p. 56.
3. C. Toumanoff, “Armenia and Georgia” (1966), pp. 593ff.
4. Theophanes, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, AD 284–813, trans.
Cyril A. Mango et al. (1997) (hereafter cited as Theophanes), no. 82, AM
5906, p. 128.
5. See Averil Cameron, “Vandal and Byzantine Africa” (2001), pp. 553ff.
6. Marcellinus Comes, trans. Brian Coke (1995) (hereafter cited as Mar-
cellinus Comes), p. 17.
7. Theophanes, no. 101, AM 5941, p. 157.
8. Ibid., no. 103, AM 5942, p. 159.
9. Liber Pontiﬁcalis, 47.6, in Raymond Davis, trans., The Book of Pontiffs
(1989), p. 39.
10. Otto J. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns (1973), p. 125.
11. In an immense literature, see Anatoly M. Khazanov, Nomads and the Out-
side World (1994), from p. 69, on the “non-autarky of the pastoral econ-
omy.”
12. Excerpta de Legationibus gentium ad Romanos, 3, in R. C. Blockley, The
Fragmentary Classicizing Historians of the Later Roman Empire (1983),
pp. 2:237–239.
13. E. A. Thompson, The Huns (1996), p. 214.
14. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 6, in Blockley, Fragmen-
tary Classicizing Historians, p. 2:423.
15. Paul Stephenson corrected my own misinterpretation; private communica-
tion, February 16, 2008.
16. See John [F.] Haldon, “Blood and Ink: Some Observations on Byzantine At-
titudes towards Warfare and Diplomacy” (1992), from p. 281.
17. In a vast literature, the foundation remains A. H. M. Jones, The Later Ro-
man Empire (1973), from p. 1:608.
18. Prokopios, History of the Wars (hereafter cited as Wars): The Persian War,
bk. 1, i, 8–15, in H. B. Dewing, ed. and trans., Procopius (1962–1978),
pp. 1:6–7.
19. The “pseudo-Avar” question (in Theophylact Siimocatta from VII.7.10, which
reads as a romanced version of Menander’s fragment 19.1) is of scant inter-
est; see Peter B. Golden, Introduction to the History of the Turkic Peoples
(1992), pp. 109ff. Professor Golden was more deﬁnitive verbally, October
23, 2003, on the Avar–Jou jan connection. See Walter Pohl, Die Awaren
(2002), p. 158.
20. Excerpta de Legationibus gentium ad Romanos, 1, in The History of
Menander the Guardsman, trans. R. C. Blockley (1985), p. 49.
21. = Greek Outrigouroi from Utur or Otur Oghur = the thirty Oghurs—clan
or tribes; and Koutrigouroi from Quturghur, from Toqur Oghur = the nine
Oghurs; personal communication from Professor Peter B. Golden, April 15,
2008.
22. Michael Whitby and Mary Whitby, The History of Theophylact Simocatta
(1986), bk. 8, 3.2–6, p. 212.
440
• Notes to Pages 49–60

--- PDF PAGE 456 ---
23. See Walter Emil Kaegi Jr., “The Contribution of Archery to the Turkish
Conquest of Anatolia” (2007), pp. 237–267.
24. See Nike Koutrakou, “Diplomacy and Espionage: Their Role in Byzantine
Foreign Relations, 8–10th Centuries” (2007), p. 137, reprinted from
Graeco-Arabica pp. 6:125–144.
25. Anecdota, bk. XXX, 12–16, in Dewing, ed. and trans., Procopius (1969),
pp. 6:351–353.
26.
“When
Chrysaphius
had
demanded
gold
[for
his
appointment],
Flavian sent him sacred vessels to humiliate him.” In Michael Whitby,
trans., The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius Scholasticus (2000), bk. II, 2,
p. 61.
27. Excerpta de Legationibus gentium ad Romanos, 5, in Blockley, Fragmen-
tary Classicizing Historians, p. 2:245.
28. The hostile Theophanes Confessor describes Chrysaphius’s techniques in
AM 5940, paras. 98–100. Theophanes, pp. 153–155.
29. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 3, in Blockley, Fragmen-
tary Classicizing Historians, pp. 2:255. Iran’s contemporary post-shah bar-
barians have been less civilized.
30. Ibid., p. 2:295.
31. Cyril Mango, “The Water Supply of Constantinople” (1995), p. 13.
32. Ibid., p. 16.
33. J. Durliat, “L’approvisionnement de Constantinople” (1995), p. 20.
34. G[ilbert] Dagron, “Poissons, pêcheurs et poissonniers de Constantinople”
(1995), p. 59; Diocletian’s limit (no doubt exceeded) was 24 denarii per
pound of ﬁrst-quality fresh ﬁsh.
35. Most recently collated in John H. Pryor and Elizabeth M. Jeffreys, The
Age of the Dromon: The Byzantine Navy ca. 500–1204 (2006); compare
the earlier Hélène Ahrweiler’s Byzance et la Mer: La marine de guerre,
la politique et les institutions maritimes de Byzance aux VIIe–XVe sie-
cles(1966).
36. Marcellinus Comes, p. 19.
37. For an overview that incidentally corrects common misconceptions, see
Paul E. Chevedden, “Artillery in Late Antiquity” (1999), pp. 131–173.
38. J. F. Haldon, “Strategies of Defence, Problems of Security: The Garrisons of
Constantinople in the Middle Byzantine Period” (1995) p. 146.
39. S.v. “Long Wall,” The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, ed. Alexander P.
Kazhdan et al. (1991), p. 2:1250. Also J. G. Crow, “The Long Walls of
Thrace” (1995), pp. 109ff. Considerable parts survive. See James Crow,
Alessandra Ricci, and Richard Bayliss, University of Newcastle Anastasian
Wall Project, at http://longwalls.ncl.ac.uk/AnastasianWall.htm.
40. Bk. III, 38, in Whitby, Evagrius Scholasticus, p. 183.
41. Novel 26, De Praetore Thraciae: Praefatio: “In Longo enim muro duos
quosdam sedere vicarios.” Vicars were, in effect, deputy praetorian pre-
fects; conveniently from http://web.upmf-grenoble.fr/Haiti/Cours/Ak/Cor-
pus/Novellae.htm.
Notes to Pages 61–77
• 441

--- PDF PAGE 457 ---
42. Golden, History of the Turkic Peoples, pp. 98–100; and private communi-
cation from Professor Golden, March 23, 2008.
43. Prokopios, Wars, bk. V, xxvii, 27–29, in Dewing, Procopius, p. 3:261.
44. Compare the appraisal in Averil Cameron, “Justin I and Justinian” (2001),
pp. 67ff. (I wrote the above before reading Cameron.)
45. Prokopios, Wars, bk. 3, XI, 2, in Dewing, Procopius, from p. 2:101.
46. Ibid., bk. 5, xxvii, 27, p. 3:261.
47. Ibid., bk. 5, 9, 12, from p. 3:87.
48. Ibid., bk. 5, 14, 1, 2, pp. 3:141, 142.
49. John Haldon, The Byzantine Wars: Battles and Campaigns of the Byzantine
Era (2001), pp. 37–44.
50. Novel 30, De Proconsule Cappadociae, chap. XI.2.
51. See below for Long Wall and Dara. For the 320,000 pounds of gold, see
Anecdota, bk. 19, 7, in Dewing, Procopius, p. 6:229.
52. Buildings, from bk. 1, 1, 24, in Dewing, Procopius, from p. 7:11.
53. John Moorhead, “The Byzantines in the West in the Sixth Century”(2005),
p. 127.
54. Not even Halsall’s very recent Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West,
376–568 (2007), which says that the plague merely “erodes morale”
(p. 504). But now see Lester K. Little, ed., Plague and the End of Antiquity:
The Pandemic of 541–750 (2006).
55. Dewing, Procopius, pp. 1:451–465.
56. Ibid., p. 1:465.
57. Chaps. 48 and 49, in Charles Forster Smith, ed., Thucydides: History of the
Peloponnesian War (1951), pp. 1:343, 345.
58. Notably by J. Durliat, “La peste du VIme siècle, pour un nouvel examen de
sources byzantins” (1989), pp. 107–119. For the historiographical context,
see Lester K. Little, “Life and Afterlife of the First Plague Pandemic” (2006),
pp. 3–32; on Durliat, see p. 17.
59. See, for example, P. Allen, “The ‘Justinianic’ Plague” (1979), pp. 5–20.
60. Whitby, Evagrius Scholasticus, pp. 229–231.
61. Pseudo-Dionysius of Tel-Mahre: Chronicle, Known Also as the Chronicle of
Zuqnin, pt. 3, trans. Witold Witakowski (1996), pp. 74–75.
62. Ibid., pp. 80–81.
63. Michael Whitby, “Recruitment in Roman Armies from Justinian to
Heraclius (c. 565–615)” (1995), p. 93.
64. Cameron, “Justin I and Justinian,” pp. 76, 77, order reversed.
65. A biovar similar to Orientalis: see I. Wiechmann and G. Grupe, “Detection
of Yersinia pestis in Two Early Medieval Skeletal Finds from Aschheim (Up-
per Bavaria, 6th century A.D.)” (2005), pp. 48–55. It was earlier presumed
that the biovar was antiqua (so named because of the 541 pandemic), which
persists and is less lethal.
66. According to William F. Ruddiman, “The anthropogenic greenhouse era
began thousands of years ago”: http://courses.eas.ualberta.ca/eas457/
Ruddiman2003.pdf. See also the debate in Real Climate, December 5,
442
• Notes to Pages 78–91

--- PDF PAGE 458 ---
2005, “Debate over the Early Anthropogenic Hypothesis,” at http://www
.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2005/12/early-anthropocene-
hyppothesis/. Regarding predation, the last lion in Anatolia was killed in
1870; the last Caspian tiger was killed in 1959; a few Cheetahs survive.
67. Hugh N. Kennedy, “Justinianic Plague in Syria and the Archaeological Evi-
dence” (2006), p. 95.
68. Richard Alston, “Managing the Frontiers: Supplying the Frontier Troops in
the Sixth and Seventh Centuries” (2002), p. 417, writes that in Anecdota
xxiv, 12, Prokopios is malevolent (true) and exaggerating (not).
69. Agathias Scholasticus, Histories V.2. J. B. Bury (born 1861), on whom we
happily depend, must be allowed his titillation—it is the volume’s longest ci-
tation: History of the Later Roman Empire: From the Death of Thodosius I
to the Death of Justinian (1958), p. 2:305.
70. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 1, lines 13–30, in
Blockley, History of Menander, pp. 43–45. On the Kutrigurs and Utrigurs,
see Golden, History of the Turkic Peoples, pp. 98–100.
71. Bk.
IV,
13.7–13,
in
Whitby
and
Whitby,
History
of
Theophylact
Simocatta(1986), pp. 121–122. See Walter E. Kaegi, Byzantium and the
Early Islamic Conquests (1992), p. 32.
II. Byzantine Diplomacy
1. For overviews, see Alexander Kazhdan, “The Notion of Byzantine Diplo-
macy,” p. 17, and Jonathan Shepard, “Byzantine Diplomacy, AD 800–1204:
Means and Ends,” pp. 42–45, both in Shepard and Franklin, Byzantine Di-
plomacy (1992).
2. Coincidentally a byzantinist, Mabillon (1632–1707) was a pupil of Charles
du Fresne, sieur Du Cange (1610–1688), the greatest early scholar of Byzan-
tium.
3. Garrett Mattingly, Renaissance Diplomacy (1988), p. 61.
3. Envoys
1. Not “Gok,” which is modern Turkish, nor from blue = sky = Tengri Ulgen,
shamanistic Sky God, beloved of secular nationalists keen on pre-Islamic
Turkdom; Peter B. Golden, Introduction to the History of the Turkic Peo-
ples (1992), p. 117, and personal communication, December 6, 2007: “Kök
Türk is never used regarding the Western Türk Qaghanate.”
2. R. C. Blockley, trans., The History of Menander the Guardsman (1985),
pp. 116–117.
3. On Byzantine-Sasanian relations, see R. C. Blockley, East Roman Foreign
Policy: Formation and Conduct from Diocletian to Anastasius (1992),
pp. 121–127; and James Howard-Johnston, “The Two Great Powers in
Late Antiquity: A Comparison” (1995), pp. 3:157–226.
4. Golden, History of the Turkic Peoples, p. 129; Blockley, History of
Notes to Pages 92–99
• 443

--- PDF PAGE 459 ---
Menander, p. 264 n. 129. Blockley favors the Tekes valley, perhaps the locus
of the Ch’ien Ch’uan (“Thousand Springs”) of Chinese sources.
5. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 8, in Blockley, History of
Menander, p. 119.
6. Ibid., pp. 121–123.
7. Excerpta de Legationibus gentiun ad Romanos 9, in Blockley, History of
Menander, p. 127.
8. Blockley, History of Menander, p. 153.
9. The Anonymous Byzantine Treatise on Strategy, sec. 43; previously known
as Peri Strategikes or, more commonly, De re strategica. In George T. Den-
nis, ed. and trans., Three Byzantine Military Treatises (1985), pp. 125–127.
10. Prosper: Prosperi Tironis, Epitoma chronicon (1892/1980), p. 1:465.
11. Vita Germani, 28. From Andrew Gillett, Envoys and Political Communica-
tion in the Late Antique West, 411–533 (2003), p. 121.
12. Carmina, VII, lines 308–311. “Avite, novas; saevum tua pagina regem lecta
domat; iussisse sat est te, quod rogat orbis; credent hoc umquam gentes
populique futuri? Littera Romani cassat quod, barbare, vincis.” Text in
W. B. Anderson, Sidonius: Poems and Letters (1963), p. 1:144.
13. Excerpta de Legationibus gentium ad Romanos, 3, in Blockley, History of
Menander, p. 51.
14. Ibid., 1, in Blockley, History of Menander, p. 49.
15. Chronicon Paschale, indiction 11, year 13 [year 623], in Michael Whitby
and Mary Whitby, trans., Chronicon Paschale, 284–628 A.D. (1989),
p. 165.
16. Theophanes, no. 302, AM 6110, p. 434.
17. Excerpta de Legationibus gentium ad Romanos, 7, in Blockley, History of
Menander, p. 115.
18. Patzinakitai in contemporary Greek sources; Golden, History of the Turkic
Peoples, from p. 264.
19. De Administrando Imperio, ed. Gy. Moravcsik, trans. R. J. H. Jenkins
(1967) (hereafter cited as DAI). Mischievously reintroduced by Ihor
Sevcenko, “Re-reading Constantine Porphyrogenitus” (1992), pp. 167ff.
20. DAI, vol. 2: Commentary, ed. R. J. H. Jenkins et al. (1962) (hereafter cited
as DAI—Commentary), sec. 8, pp. 55–57. On “Zakana” (lines 8–17), com-
pare modern Russian zakon = law, derived from archaic kon = border,
limit. DAI—Commentary, sec. 38, introductory note, pp. 145–146.
21. Excerpta de Legationibus Romanorum ad gentes, 3, lines 305–390, in
Blockley, History of Menander, pp. 71–75.
22. Ibid., lines 408–423, in Blockley, History of Menander, p. 77. I follow
Blockley (p. 255 n. 47): the procedure is not a textual “doublet” but authen-
tic—and certainly prudent.
23. Theodosian Code VI, De Agentibus in rebus, 27.23; Justinian’s Code XII.20.3.
24. Otto
Seeck,
Notitia
Dignitatum
accedunt
Notitia
Urbis
Constan-
tinopolitanae Laterculi Prouinciarum (1876), pp. 31–33. I adhere to Peter
Brennan’s skeptical interpretation—see “Mining a Mirage,” a subheading
444
• Notes to Pages 99–108

--- PDF PAGE 460 ---
in his introduction to his Notitia (forthcoming); he kindly sent me the text
on March 31, 2008.
25. Five in the Diocese of Oriens; four in Pontica; one in Asiana; two in the Dio-
cese of the two Thraces; and four in the Diocese of Illyricum.
26. J. B. Bury, “The Imperial Administrative System in the Ninth Century with a
Revised Text of the Kletorologion of Philotheos” (1911), 32.
27. Prokopios, Anecdota, bk. XXX, 4–7, in H. B. Dewing, ed. and trans.,
Procopius (1962–1978), pp. 6:347–349.
28. Louis Bréhier, Les Institutions de l’empire Byzantin(1949/1970), pp. 263–
268; there was also an optical telegraph, pp. 268–270.
29. Hunt papyrus data in the John Ryland Library, but I follow Peter Heather,
The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians
(2006), p. 105.
30. John Lydus [John the Lydian], On the Magistracies of the Roman Constitu-
tion trans. T. F. Carney (1965), bk. II.10.5.
31. N. J. E. Austin and N. B. Rankov, Exploratio: Military and Political Intelli-
gence in the Roman World from the Second Punic War to the Battle of
Adrianople (1995), p. 152.
32. D. A. Miller, “The Logothete of the Drome in the Middle Byzantine Period”
(1966), pp. 438–470.
33. C. D. Gordon, “The Subsidization of Border Peoples as a Roman Policy of
Imperial Defense” (1948).
34. Michael F. Hendy, Studies in the Byzantium Monetary Economy, c. 300–
1450 (1985), p. 261.
35. Blockley, East Roman Foreign Policy, pp. 149–150; Blockley, “Subsidies
and Diplomacy: Rome and Persia in Late Antiquity” (Spring 1985), pp. 62–
74.
36. Blockley, East Roman Foreign Policy, pp. 151ff.
4. Religion and Statecraft
1. John Meyendorff, Byzantium and the Rise of Russia(1989), from p. 173.
2. Robert de Clari, La Prise de Constantinople (1873/1966), chap. 73, pp. 57–
58.
3. Buildings, I.i.61–64, in H. B. Dewing, ed. and trans., Procopius (1962–
1978), p. 7:33.
4. Saxo Grammaticus, Gesta Danorum, bk. 12.7.4, http://www2.kb.dk/elib/
lit//dan/saxo/lat/or.dsr/index.htm.
5. The title of Ioli Kalavrezou’s essay in Henry Maguire, ed., Byzantine Court
Culture from 829 to 1204 (1997), pp. 53–79.
6. On the number of relics in Constantinople, see Kalavrezou, “Helping Hands,”
p. 53, citing O. Meinardus, “A Study of the Relics of the Greek Church”
Oriens Christianus, no. 54 (1970) pp. 130–133.
7. Samuel H. Cross and Olgerd P. Sherbowitz-Wetzor, The Russian Primary
Chronicle: Laurentian Text (1953), p. 111.
Notes to Pages 108–120
• 445
