 Coup d’Etat COUP D’ÉTAT A PRACTICAL HANDBOOK REVISED EDITION EDWARD N. LUTTWAK Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England 2016 

 Coup d’Etat First published in Great Britain by Allen Lane The Penguin Press 1968 Preface and Revisions copyright © 2016 Edward N. Luttwak Appendix C. Figures copyright © 2016 Luther Patenge Copyright © 1968, 1979 Edward N. Luttwak All rights reserved Jacket design: Tim Jones 978-0-674-73726-6 (pbk. : alk. paper) 978-0-674-96965-0 (EPUB) 978-0-674-96966-7 (MOBI) The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows: Luttwak, Edward, author. Coup d’état : a practical handbook / Edward N. Luttwak.—Revised edition. pages cm “First published in Great Britain by Allen Lane The Penguin Press 1968”—Title page verso. Includes bibliographical references and index. 1. Coups d’état—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title. JC494.L88 2016 321.09—dc23 2015033858 

 Coup d’Etat To my father, Josif Luttwak z.l., 22 October 1968 And to my mother, Clara z.l., 6 July 1981 

 Coup d’Etat Contents List of Figures List of Tables Acknowledgment Preface to the 2016 Edition Preface to the First Edition Foreword by Walter Laqueur (1978) 1. What Is the Coup d’État? 2. When Is a Coup d’État Possible? 3. The Strategy of the Coup d’État 4. The Planning of the Coup d’État 5. The Execution of the Coup d’État Appendix A. The Economics of Repression Appendix B. Tactical Aspects of the Coup d’État Appendix C. Statistics Index 

 Coup d’Etat Figures 4.1. Alternative forms of government 4.2. The formal government and the real one 4.3. Telecommunication facilities available to governments 4.4. The physical targets of the coup 4.5. Physical targets in a coastal city 5.1. Operational sequence and timing 5.2. Intelligence “noise” and analysis 5.3. Lead time required by teams to reach their targets 5.4. Simultaneous penetration of the defensive warning system A.1. Political survival limit on taxation A.2. The Duvalier formula B.1. “Sophisticated” seizure of major defended targets B.2. General structure of blocking position C.1. Frequency of coups d’état, 1950–2010 C.2. Proportion of successful vs. failed coups d’état, 1950–2010 C.3. Frequency of coups d’état by region, 1950–2010 (stacked) C.4. Frequency of coups d’état by region, 1950–2010 (unstacked) C.5. Distribution of coups d’état by region, 1945–1965 C.6. Distribution of coups d’état by region, 1966–2010 

 Coup d’Etat Tables 3.1. Formal structures and real chains of command 3.2. Country X: potential forces of intervention 3.3. Optimum infiltration strategy 3.4. The role of ethnic minorities in Syrian politics 3.5. Class of 19— at military academy of Country X: present career position 3.6. The Aref brothers in Iraq, 1958–1966: a study in loyalty 3.7. Battalion No. 1: recruitment prospects 3.8. Infiltration of the armed forces in Portugal 3.9. Infiltration of the armed forces in Germany 4.1. Groups that try to influence US policies in the Middle East 4.2. Alternative forms of government 4.3. Mass communications in the Middle East and North Africa, mid-1967 4.4. Police telecommunication facilities in Ghana, 1967 5.1. The mechanics of intervention of the loyalist forces 5.2. The first communiqué: a choice of styles B.1. Eve of the coup: forces of the state fully subverted C.1. Economic development and the coup d’état, 1945–2010 C.2. Basic list of coups and attempted coups, 1945–2010 C.3. The efficiency of the coup d’état, 1945–2010: outcome as a function of main party C.4. The frequency of the coup d’état: region and time distribution of coup, 1945–2010 

 Coup d’Etat Acknowledgment I enlisted Sawyer Blazek, a scholarly practitioner with then recent African experience and now an adviser on national security affairs, to help me update the book. It was a fortunate decision because it was with talented acuity that he separated the old but instructive from the outdated that needed replacement. Thanks to his work, my revision was greatly facilitated. I am happy to acknowledge his valiant assistance. 

 Coup d’Etat Preface to the 2016 Edition When writing what became the first edition of this book almost half a century ago, I scarcely imagined that it would have an entire existence of its own, remaining in print till today through seven editions in English and nineteen editions in foreign languages from Arabic to Russian, although the Chinese edition has been published, very elegantly, only in Taiwan. • • • A few things have changed since I wrote the original text. Coup plotters, for example, cannot expect to gain much these days by seizing “the radio station,” first, because instead of a single national radio broadcaster there might now be a dozen, even in very small countries; but more, because broadcasting of any kind counts for less and less in a world of narrowcasting via social media. This and other technical changes are duly accounted for in this revised text, but all through the years to the last coup recorded in 2015, the essence of the coup d’état has remained exactly the same: it is a special form of politics that requires guns as an aid to persuasion, although coups rarely succeed if guns are much used and fail totally if the situation degenerates into civil war—the polar opposite of the swift and bloodless coup d’état. In reviewing the text to determine what changes might be needed for the 2016 edition, I found many small details in need of updating but also a major omission: corruption as the trigger of many a coup d’état. It is all a matter of incentives. In the absence of significant corruption, the coup plotters who risk their necks to overthrow their seniors and seize control of the government can gain only an increase in status, but not vast wealth. The difference in salaries and pensions between colonels and presidents is downright negligible as compared to the risks. With corruption, however, those who seize power can enrich themselves enormously, sometimes by simply taking what they want from the country’s national bank with its foreign-exchange reserves, or, more discreetly, by taking their cut on all state purchases, by exacting bribes from all who need anything from the government, by securing loans from state banks that are never repaid, or by setting up family members as business agents—indeed there are myriad ways of converting state power into self-enrichment. The corrupt rulers of even the smallest and poorest countries can swiftly become billionaires. Corruption, therefore, actually generates coups because if successful their material rewards can be so very large. One major change since the original text was published in 1968 has been the widespread implementation of specific anti- coup precautions and provisions. To some degree, they may have been stimulated by the original book itself—or so I have been told by the security officials of more than one country: while coup plot ters have tried to benefit from its contents (more on this notion later), potentates and their minders have seemingly done the same in designing their anti- coup measures. By far the most important is to maintain distinct, indeed entirely separate military, paramilitary, and other security organizations so that none has a monopoly of force. Typically, there is a “national,” “presidential,” or “revolutionary” guard equipped heavily enough to resist the regular army, and also a militia of fellow ethnics in some cases. In addition, there is always some inner-core palace security force of several hundred at least, but sometimes of thousands, exceptionally well trained or at least very well equipped by local standards, and which must of course be commanded by a son or nephew of the ruler, with as many relatives, or at least fellow clan members, as possible in their cadre of officers, and even the other ranks enlisted from the clan or at least the ethnic group of the rulers. Sometimes openly labeled as a Presidential or Royal or Revolutionary guard division, brigade, or regiment, such inner-core forces may also bear deliberately nondescript designations, even though everybody knows that, say, the 12th Division or 27th Brigade or 355th Battalion is really the “it” force—the one with all the latest equipment, above-average facilities, higher pay, and the ruler’s relatives in command. Even safely democratic countries keep a variety of distinct military and security forces wearing different uniforms despite their overlapping functions. The difference, however, is that their distinct forces are constantly enjoined to communicate, coordinate, and cooperate with each other, and usually come under “joint” commands staffed by all of them to better unify their actions. When diversity has an anti- coup function, however, there is no joint operational headquarters, and far from being enjoined to cooperate, any communication among the different forces is discouraged, or even prohibited: social gatherings seemingly as innocent as a birthday party may well evoke acute suspicion, followed perhaps by interrogations if officers of, say, army, national guard, and gendarmerie are all present. This politically imposed absence of intercommunication and coordination is a major cause, incidentally, for the Arab military debacles that foreign observers routinely attribute to gross professional incompetence alone. The case of South Korea is also illustrative: It was precisely for the sake of better coordination in responding to the threat of North Korean commando attacks that the United States pressed the South Koreans to merge their Army Security Command, Navy Security Unit, and Air Force Office of Special Investigations into a single organization. A fully integrated, authentically joint Defense Security Command was ceremoniously inaugurated in October 1977. Two years later, its two-star commanding general, Chun Doo Hwan, used his fully unified command and monopoly of immediate force to seize power when the country’s president, Park Chung Hee, was assassinated. There was no one to restrain him when Chun investigated, judged, and condemned the country’s top general, the army’s chief of staff, and then jumped over all the three-star and four-star officers above him to make himself the country’s president. It could not have happened if there had still been three competing security organizations instead of a monopoly. • • • Another anti- coup provision routinely employed in vulnerable countries is espionage of a particular kind, focused not outwardly on foreign countries but inwardly on the country’s own armed and security forces—all of them, from the regular air force, army, even navy, to the national guard, revolutionary guard, and the inner-core security force of the regime as well. Because inner-core forces are literally closest to the ruler, they are also potentially the most dangerous. Inward espionage is the most valuable of anti- coup measures because there can be no sudden, overnight coup without prior agreements among the plotters; those agreements in turn require prior talks leading to detailed negotiations on who does what in the coup and who gets what the day after, when, power having been seized, its rewards by way of promotions and positions are divided up. All this implies a great deal of pre- coup communications that can be overheard—or even heard face-to-face—if agents of the regime insert themselves among the coup plotters. Such agents can even initiate the plotting to identify potentially dangerous individuals who are best eliminated before they have a chance to plot a real coup of their own. The problem with espionage, however, is that those who spy on the coup plotters are in the best position to join them, with all the incentives of power and riches if the coup is successful. The remedy, of course, is to have multiple, entirely separate, inward espionage outfits to answer the ancient question of who will guard the guardians. Once known, this multiplicity deters regime spies from joining the coup plotters because of the possibility that the plotters include other regime spies who can expose them. Thus, in Syria, even before the civil war now under way, the ruling regime of President Bashar al-Assad already had five separate and competing espionage services: (a) the so-called Air Force Intelligence Directorate, which hardly bothers with enemy air forces but focuses instead on internal security against rebels and possible coup plotters (note that the last successful coup in Syria was executed precisely by an air force chief, Hafez al-Assad, father of the current president; (b) the General Security Directorate, which investigates, arrests, interrogates, and tortures suspected enemies of the regime, civil or military; (c) the Military Intelligence Directorate, which occasionally does or did some actual military intelligence work but now focuses exclusively on fellow Syrians who oppose the regime verbally or violently; (d) the National Security Bureau of the Arab Socialist Ba‘ath Party, which is officially the ruling party but which ceased to be a functioning political body long ago and is now merely a brand of the Assad family and clan; and (e) the Political Security Directorate, which originally focused on members of the nominally ruling Ba‘ath Party before spying on all potential enemies of the regime—resulting in a heavy workload as of late 2015, given that roughly 75 percent of the population is actively fighting or at least passively resisting the Assad regime. What all these organizations have in common is that their key positions are mostly held by Alawites (or more accurately, Nusayris, prior to a 1920s rebranding), followers of a nominally Shi‘a religion, along with some Christians and Druzes (the latter being another heretical sect), but with very few Sunni Muslims, the country’s majority population. Not coincidentally, the Assads are also Alawites more accurately. Moreover, as of 2015, with civil war under way, the General Security Directorate and its four competitors are no longer alone in spying on fellow Syrians in the armed forces, the government, or the population at large; new security forces have been raised, manned primarily by Alawites, and some have now formed their own espionage units. But even this abundant multiplicity would not have impressed Yasser Arafat. While ruling the Palestinian ministate established in 1994 under the Oslo Accords, he established some twelve sepa rate espionage organizations, which focused on his fellow Palestinians rather than on Israeli or other Arab targets; they served him particularly well in 1997, when the Palestinian Liberation Council, the parliament in effect, accused Arafat of “financial mismanagement” (his widow lives very elegantly in Paris till now) and Arafat refused to resign his post. Council members were swiftly intimidated into silence. Multiplicity works as an anti- coup measure, and it works best when there are competing armed forces, as well as rival internal espionage outfits. But such arrangements, of course, greatly increase the costs of operating the regime, reducing its ability to give out benefits to gain popularity and making it that much more likely that unrest will smolder, leading to violent repression, resistance, and even civil war. That is what happened in Syria once the frozen immobility of prolonged dictatorship was shaken in 2011 by news of earlier uprisings in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya. Over the nearly five decades since the original publication of this book, I have been told from time to time that it served as the guide for this or that coup (in the Philippines, its use has been documented in two successive coups). But the earliest case of actual use for which there is firm evidence would make a poor advertisement: the coup in question was a total failure. Its chief protagonist, Mohammad Oufkir, was Morocco’s minister of defense and security plenipotentiary, the kingdom’s most powerful person after King Hassan II—an exception he seemingly found irksome. On August 16, 1972, four F-5 jet fighters of the Royal Air Force, reportedly acting on Oufkir’s orders, intercepted Hassan’s Boeing 727 jet as it was flying back from France, firing their powerful 20mm guns at short range. Their aim was remarkably poor, and Hassan’s aircraft managed to land safely at Rabat’s airport. It was then strafed by air force jets, with the cannon killing eight and injuring forty, but not Hassan; loyal troops came to protect him, while others soon proceeded to the Kenitra Air Base of the rebellious air force officers, where hundreds were arrested. Oufkir was found dead of multiple gunshot wounds later that day. When his study was searched, a heavily annotated and blood-splattered copy of the French edition of this book was found on his desk. I could take refuge in the excuse that the book’s prescriptions were not followed with sufficient care, but in reality it was not my purpose to supply a bona fide do-it-yourself manual. My true aim in writing this book was entirely different: it was to explore the meaning of politics in the many backward countries politely described as “emerging.” Some, including South Korea, have well and truly emerged since then, but many others have not—Islam in particular seems to be an insurmountable obstacle to democratic governance. When the ideas in this book were first conceived, the intellectual classes of the Western world were passionately interested in the affairs of what they then called the Third World. There was an atmosphere of hopeful expectation about the new states of Africa and Asia emerging on the world scene for the first time. Even for Latin America, there was a new interest and a new sense of hope—greatly stimulated by President John F. Kennedy’s “Alliance for Progress,” which, like all of Kennedy’s projects, enjoyed excellent publicity. But it was undoubtedly sub-Saharan or Black Africa that stimulated the greatest interest, much of it remarkably emotional. The dissolution of the British and French empires was then still in progress, and the new states of Africa were the newest of all. Their abject poverty was not entirely concealed by the exotic scenery; the almost complete absence of an educated class was brutally obvious. Yet, it was only a few right-wing extremists, and the still smaller number of old African hands, who argued that independence was being granted too soon. This small minority was easily dismissed as reactionary and racist. The enlightened knew better: the new states would muster the fresh energies of the peoples liberated from the lethargy of colonial rule; their youth would soon be educated to provide technicians, professionals, and civil servants; given some aid from the West, a great upsurge of economic development was to be expected, and this would soon remedy backwardness and the contrived poverty caused by colonial exploitation. More than that, we were told to look for moral leadership from the new states. The idealistic young leaders who had struggled for independence would be a great spiritual force on the world scene. As a student at the London School of Economics, I heard such things being said as if they were not merely true but obvious. I had no desire to join the small band of right wingers who alone opposed the accelerated devolution of the British Empire. But I found the common view to be hopelessly removed from reality; even the best minds seemed to suffer a decomposition of the critical faculties when the subject was the Third World. This is not the place to speculate on the obscure emotional reasons that alone could explain such a failure of the intellect. What is certain is that a highly favorable vision of the future of the Third World was given wide currency, even though all the factual evidence in hand flatly contradicted all such predictions. It was not the poverty of the new states that made me dubious of their future and entirely pessimistic about their contribution to international life. Poverty does not necessarily inhibit cultural or even social achievement, and, in any case, some of the least promising of the new states were not poor—they enjoyed vast unearned incomes from oil exports. As for the lack of adequate administrative structures, this was certainly not a fatal deficiency because few things grow as easily as state bureaucracies. Not even the ill effects of relative deprivation felt by the poor, confronted with luxuries by way of the mass media, seemed to me to be all that serious. It appears that the “revolution of rising expectations,” yet another slogan made up by Western intellectuals to justify forthcoming depredations, has remained unrealized. But there was one deficiency that was, and is, fatal—a deficiency that would inevitably cause the new states to misgovern at home while degrading international standards abroad. There was one thing that the new states lacked—something they could neither make for themselves nor obtain from abroad: this was a genuine political community. It is difficult to give a formal definition of political community. Perhaps it is best to begin by evoking the familiar concept of “the nation” as opposed to that of “the state.” The new states came into existence because the colonial authorities handed over their powers to political leaders who had agitated for independence; more specifically, the new leaders were given control over the army, police, tax collectors, and administrators who had worked for the colonial government. The old servants of the empire served their new masters, ostensibly for new purposes. But their methods and their operational ideology were those of the imperial power—which were shaped by notions that reflected the values of its political community, including legality. There was no organic nexus between the native cultures and the instruments of state power, and neither could such a link be formed. For one thing, there were usually several native cultures, typically quite different and often inimical. Moreover, the methods and operational ideologies that the native cultures would organically sustain were usually unsuited to the needs of modern life—that is, Western life. The problem was not that this dissociation would make the state apparatus weak, but rather that it would leave it entirely unconstrained and much too strong. The consequences soon became evident. The new rulers were vested with all the crushing powers over individuals that the entire machinery of files and records, vehicles, telecommunications, and modern weapons gave to the departed colonial states they had inherited. But their conduct was not constrained by any notions of legality or by the ethical standards that any functioning political community must enforce, even if only to the extent of requiring hypocrisy and discretion on the part of violators. Above all, their conduct was not restrained by ordinary political resistance because the first leaders who gained office with independence soon ensured their enduring monopoly of power. That was first asserted by outlawing or illegally shutting down any rival political party, but it was better assured by the feeble opposition of the oppressed majority, which lacked the social frameworks for effective opposition of any kind, whether peaceful or violent. Misgovernment was thus preordained, even before the proclamation of “one-party states” became fashionable; at the time, the new dictatorships were even justified by the claim that they would accelerate economic development, a notion that now seems very strange but that derived from the then widespread delusion that the Soviet Union was advancing rapidly economically because its own one-party state was not hindered by democratic squabbling. Always present, bribery became a normal part of any transaction with the state, while a pervasive if chaotic oppression replaced the distant authoritarianism of colonial days because neither bureaucrats nor policemen or soldiers were restrained by any form of legality. As a result, exactions could increase without limit, and no citizen was assured of liberty, life, or property merely by complying with the law, which was freely violated by its official custodians. (In Accra I once saw speeding tickets handed out to drivers stuck in traffic.) If colonialism were a crime, its greatest offense was its abrupt undoing. It left fragile native cultures, embryonic modern societies, and minority peoples utterly ill equipped to protect themselves when power was abandoned into the hands of political leaders armed with the powerful machine of the modern state. It took the brutalities of Uganda’s Idi Amin and other such extreme outrages to briefly attract the attention of Western observers, while many other autocrats more quietly exploited their unfettered control over the machinery of the state to indulge every vice and every excess of virtue: in one country, the alcoholic ruler could order executions arbitrarily; in another, alcohol might be forbidden to all; more commonly, the most useless of luxuries were abundantly imported while there was no foreign currency for essential vaccines and antibiotics. Above all, there was the abundant use of the instruments of national defense and public order for internal oppression, along with the diversion of public revenues to private pockets on such a scale that public services relentlessly declined in most places, often to nullity. That was the diseased reality I anticipated in the early 1960s in place of hopeful fantasies. Naturally, one of the consequences of this corruption, along with countless tragedies, was a great number of coups. Today’s sub-Saharan Africa looks very different. Tyrants are few—the utterly destructive President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe is now more of an exception than the rule—and it is more accurate to classify the majority of African states as democratizing rather than undemocratic. Along with political advancement has come a new kind of economic growth, the product of real enterprise and hard work rather than just the extraction of natural resources. Myriad problems remain in sub-Saharan Africa, including a still-pervasive culture of corruption, but it is no longer feckless optimism to expect cumulative progress in more places than not, in governance as well as economically. In the process, genuine political communities are emerging. It was their absence on any significant scale that left postcolonial African states so amply exposed to coups because it ensured the passivity of the population. In North Africa and across the Middle East, the incompatibility between any wide degree of democratic participation—or democracy, more simply—and the cultural hegemony of Islam was less evident in 1968 than it is now. That incompatibility had not yet been reaffirmed by a succession of electoral passages that seemed very promising, but which unfailingly resulted in nondemocratic outcomes. Even in Turkey, with its decades of experience with political parties and elections, as soon as the strict secularism imposed by the armed forces retreated because of their own exclusion from political power (ironically, in the name of democracy), the rules of democratic governance were undermined by the advance of the Islamist party Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi (AKP). It won successive elections in 2002, 2007, and 2011 with ever-larger majorities by promoting regressive Islamic customs in the name of tradition, Islamic education, and an increasingly Islamist foreign policy. It also started to abrogate democratic rights; imposed prohibitions on social media; arrested independent journalists; dismissed police officials, prosecutors, and judges probing the corrupt dealings of party leaders; and persistently asserted the right of the majority to rule the country as it saw fit, regardless of the vehement opposition of very many citizens. The authoritarian and increasingly loud extremism of its leader, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan (in office as prime minister since 2002 and then as president since 2014), as well as the stench of corruption (Erdoğan’s family has acquired great wealth), finally weakened the AKP in the 2015 elections, leading to its loss of a parliamentary majority; until then, the country’s less-educated voters had persistently supported Erdoğan and the AKP—evidently because, in their eyes, the prohibition of alcoholic beverages (by stealthy administrative measures), the construction of mosques in universities where even headscarves were prohibited until recently, the embrace of the Muslim Brotherhood of Egypt and of its Hamas offshoot, and Erdoğan’s vehement Islamist diatribes counted for more than the preservation of democracy. And so it is across the Muslim world—and for a perfectly logical reason: given that god himself has already given the law in its entirety in the Qur’an, which none may debate or dispute, there is really no need for legislators, who can only do harm, for example by legislating the freedom to choose one’s own religion, the equality of females, or the right to drink wine. The incompatibility between Islam and democracy—forever denied by the well meaning, forever reasserted in practice, and sometimes obscured by elections that may in themselves be perfectly free and fair—ensures the prevalence of authoritarian governments in most Muslim countries most of the time; quite a few are dynastic, with a self-perpetuating ruling family that monopolizes political power. That, in turn, ensures the passivity of the population in most places most of the time— Islam means “submission,” after all—barring the occasional revolts, soon suppressed in most cases. Passivity, in turn, favors the coup in principle; in practice, however, the implementation of anti- coup precautions has proved effective, until now at any rate, even in the seemingly most vulnerable Arab dynastic states from Morocco to Arabia. In first writing of the coup d’état back in 1968, I was, in fact, trying to present a specific way of understanding the political life of the world’s less developed, less consolidated, and certainly less democratic countries of the world. Since then, humanity has advanced very greatly in wealth—even the poorest of the poorest countries are less poor—but democracy has advanced much less, for reasons that the democratic-minded should explore rather than deny. This new edition is, in part, a contribution to that quest. 

 Coup d’Etat Preface to the First Edition This is a handbook. It is therefore not concerned with a theoretical analysis of the coup d’état, but rather with the formulation of the techniques which can be employed to seize power within a state. It can be compared to a cookery book in the sense that it aims at enabling any lay person equipped with enthusiasm—and the right ingredients—to carry out his own coup; only a knowledge of the rules is required. Two words of caution: in the first place, in order to carry out a successful coup, certain preconditions must be present, just as in cooking bouillabaisse one needs the right sorts of fish to start with; second, readers should be aware that the penalty of failure is far greater than having to eat out of a tin. The rewards, too, are greater. It may be objected that, should such a handbook be inadequate or misleading, the readers will be subject to great dangers, while if it is an efficient guide to the problems, it may lead to upheavals and disturbances. My defense is that coups are already common and if, as a result of this book, a greater number of people learn how to carry them out, this is merely a step toward the democratization of the coup —a fact that all persons of liberal sentiments should applaud. Finally, it should be noted that the techniques here discussed are politically neutral and concerned only with the objective of seizing control of the state, and not at all with subsequent policies. 

 Coup d’Etat Foreword by Walter Laqueur (1978) Coup d’État, the brilliant and original book of a then very young man, first published in 1968, attracted immediate attention and appeared subsequently in the major languages. It is perhaps of even greater interest today, simply because it has become clearer during the last decade that far from being a fortunately rare exception in an otherwise civilized world order, the coup d’état is now the normal mode of political change in most member states of the United Nations. There are by now many more military dictatorships in existence than parliamentary democracies, and there are few cases on record in which such dictatorships have been overthrown by “popular revolts.” Far more often, the military men are replaced by one or more of their colleagues. Yet, with all this, there has been a virtual taboo on the study of coups d’état, and some critics of the present book obviously did not know quite what to make of it. It is in many ways easy to see why: the idea that a coup d’état can be carried out in many parts of the world with equal ease by small groups of men of the left and the right (and, for all one knows, also of the center), provided they have mastered some elementary lessons of modern politics, is, of course, quite shocking. Marx and Engels wrote a great deal about revolution but hardly ever about the technique of revolution; the only nineteenth-century left-wing leader who provided detailed instruction in this respect was Auguste Blanqui, and he was not very successful. There had been one other predecessor, Gabriel Naudé, whose work was published in Paris in the late seventeenth century; an English translation by Dr. William King appeared in 1711 ( Political Considerations upon Refined Politicks and the Master Strokes of State ). Some of this sounds very topical indeed: The thunderbolt falls before the noise of it is heard in the skies, prayers are said before the bell is rung for them; he receives the blow that thinks he himself is giving it, he suffers who never expected it, and he dies that look’d upon himself to be the most secure; all is done in the Night and Obscurity, amongst Storms and Confusion. But Naudé has been forgotten for a long time, and his concept of the “master stroke” was, in any case, much wider than that of coup d’état in its present meaning. In our time, whole libraries have been written on the objective conditions in which revolutions take place, about civil and peasant wars, about revolutionary and internal war, about guerrilla activities and terrorism, but almost nothing on coups d’état, and this despite the fact that there have been few, if any, revolutions of late and that “objective conditions” are always only one of several factors involved in their genesis. Seen in this light, coups d’état are annoying not only for practicing politicians but also from the point of view of the political scientist. For, on the basis of “objective conditions,” models and patterns can be built without undue difficulty, whereas coups are quite unpredictable. Almost by definition, they are mortal enemies of orderly hypotheses and concepts: how does one account scientifically for the political ambitions of a few strategically well-placed individuals? All this is highly regrettable, but it does not lessen the need for a more thorough and detailed study of coups d’état. For, according to all indications, this seems to be the “wave of the future”—much more than other, far more often discussed forms of political violence. A study of guerrilla warfare led me to the conclusion that the army in most Third World countries is the strongest contender for domestic power: during the last fifteen years, there have been some 120 military coups, whereas only five guerrilla movements have come to power—and three of these followed the Portuguese coup in 1974. The function of the guerrilla movement has reverted to what it originally was—that of paving the way for and supporting the regular army: it holds the stirrup so that others may get into the saddle, and the same applies, a fortiori, to terrorist groups. It is true that in some parts of the world it has become more difficult to stage a military coup. Once upon a time, the commander of a tank brigade in a Middle Eastern country was at least a potential contender for political power. This is no longer so, partly as the result of centralization in military command, partly because the political police have become more effective. But if in these parts coups have become less frequent, they are still the only form of political change that can be envisaged at the present time. But even if coups are unpredictable, even if they defy known methods of interpretation (let alone of prediction), they contain certain ever-recurring patterns—“the same always different”—from the time the conspiracy is first hatched to the actual seizure of power. The present book is a major landmark in a field hitherto almost uncharted. Walter Laqueur Washington—London October 1978 

 Coup d’Etat Chapter 1 What Is the Coup d’État? I shall be sorry to commence the era of peace by a coup d’état such as that I had in contemplation. —Duke of Wellington, 1811 … no other way of salvation remained except for the army’s intervention … —Constantine Kollias, April 21, 1967, Athens Though the term coup d’état has been used for more than three centuries, the feasibility of the coup derives from a comparatively recent development: the rise of the modern state with its professional bureaucracy and standing armed forces. The power of the modern state largely depends on this permanent machinery, which, with its archives, files, records, and officials, can follow intimately and, if it so desires, control the activities of lesser organizations and individuals. “Totalitarian” states merely use more fully the detailed and comprehensive information available to most states, however “democratic”: the instrument is largely the same, though it is used differently. The growth of modern state bureaucracies has two implications that are crucial for the feasibility of the coup: the emergence of clear distinctions between the permanent machinery of state and the political leadership, and the fact that state bureaucracies have structured hierarchies with definite chains of command. The distinction between the bureaucrat as an employee of the state and as a personal servant of the ruler is a new one, and both the British and the American systems show residual features of the earlier structure. a The importance of this development lies in the fact that if the bureaucrats are linked to the leadership, an illegal seizure of power must take the form of a “Palace Revolution,” which essentially concerns the manipulation of the person of the ruler. That ruler may be forced to accept new policies or new advisers, or may be killed or held captive; but whatever happens, the Palace Revolution can only be conducted from the “inside,” and by “insiders.” An insider might be the commander of the palace guard, as in ancient Rome or the Ethiopia of the 1960s, and if the dynastic system is preserved, the aim is to replace the unwanted ruler with a more malleable descendant. The coup is a much more democratic affair. It can be conducted from the “outside” and operates in the area outside the government but within the state—the area formed by the permanent, professional civil service, the armed forces, and the police. The aim is to detach the permanent employees of the state from the political leadership, and usually this cannot be done if the two are linked by political, ethnic, or traditional loyalties. In the last dynasty of Imperial China, as in present-day African states, it was primarily an ethnic bond that secured the loyalty of the state apparatus. The Manchu dynasty was careful to follow native Chinese customs and it employed Han Chinese in the civil service at all levels, but the crucial posts in the high magistracy and the army were filled by the descendants of the Jurchens who had entered China with their chiefs, the founders of the dynasty. Similarly, African rulers typically appoint members of their own tribe to the key posts in the armed forces, police, and security services. When a party machine controls civil-service appointments, either as part of a more general totalitarian control or because of a very long period in office (as in postwar Italy till the late 1980s), political associates are appointed to the senior levels of the bureaucracy, partly in order to protect the regime and partly to ensure the sympathetic execution of policies. In the Communist countries of yesteryear, all senior jobs were, of course, held by party apparatchiks. • • • Saudi Arabia provides an instance of “traditional bonds.” b In this case, the lack of modern know-how on the part of the traditional tribal affiliates of the royal house has meant that what could not be done individually has been done organizationally. The modern army, manned by some 100,000 unreliable city dwellers, is outnumbered by the 125,000 or so enrolled in the “White Army” of the Bedouin—or at least nominally Bedouin—followers of the Saudis; officially known as the Haras al Watani (Guard of the Homeland) or National Guard, the so-called White Army, it includes a tribal militia of some 25,000 officially designated the Imam Muhammad bin Saud Mechanized Brigade, based in the capital of Riyadh, and plainly meant as an anti- coup force. Such ethnic or traditional bonds between the political leadership and the heads of the bureaucracy and the armed forces are not typical of the modern state, while looser class or ethnic affiliations will tend to embrace groups large enough to be successfully infiltrated by the planners of the coup. As a direct consequence of its sheer size, in order to achieve even a minimum of efficiency, the state bureaucracy has to divide its work into clear-cut areas of competence, which are assigned to different departments. Within each department, there must be an accepted chain of command, and standard procedures have to be followed. Thus, a given piece of information or a given order is followed up in a stereotyped manner, and if the order comes from the appropriate source, at the appropriate level, it is carried out. In the more critical parts of the state apparatus, the armed forces, the police, and the security services, all these characteristics are intensified with an even greater degree of discipline and rigidity. The apparatus of the state is, therefore, to some extent a “machine” that will normally behave in a fairly predictable and automatic manner. A coup operates by taking advantage of this machinelike behavior both during and after the takeover—during the coup because it uses parts of the state apparatus to seize the controlling levers over the rest, and afterward because the value of the levers depends on the degree to which the state really functions as a machine. We will see that some states are so well organized that the machine is sufficiently sophisticated to exercise discretion, according to a given conception of what is proper and what is not, in the orders that it executes. This is the case in the most advanced countries, and, in such circumstances, a coup is very difficult to carry out. In a few states, the bureaucracy is so small that the apparatus is too simple and too intimately linked with the leadership to allow room for a coup, as is still the case perhaps in the ex-British protectorates of southern Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, and Swaziland. Fortunately, most states are between those two extremes, with bureaucratic machines both large and unsophisticated, and thus highly vulnerable to those who can identify and seize the right levers. One of the most striking developments of the twentieth century was the great decline in general political stability. Since the French Revolution, governments have been overthrown at an increasing pace. c In the nineteenth century, the French experienced two revolutions, and two regimes collapsed following military defeat. In 1958, the change of regime that brought Charles de Gaulle to enduring power was a blend of both those elements. Peoples everywhere have followed the French example, and the life span of regimes has tended to decrease while the life span of their subjects has increased. This contrasts sharply with the relative attachment to the system of constitutional monarchy displayed in the nineteenth century: when Greeks, Bulgarians, and Romanians secured their freedom from the Turkish colonial system, they immediately went over to Germany in order to shop around for a suitable royal family. Crowns, flags, and decorations were designed and purchased from reputable (English) suppliers; royal palaces were built; and where possible, hunting lodges, royal mistresses, and a local aristocracy were provided as fringe benefits. Twentieth-century peoples have, on the other hand, shown a marked lack of interest in monarchies and their paraphernalia; when the British kindly provided them with a proper royal family, unhappy Iraqis made numerous efforts to dispense with it before finally succeeding by massacre in 1958. Military and other right-wing forces have, meanwhile, tried to keep up with violent mass movements, using their own illegal methods to seize power and overthrow regimes. Why did the regimes of the twentieth century prove to be so fragile? It is, after all, paradoxical that this fragility increased, while the established procedures for securing changes in government were becoming more flexible. The political scientist will reply that, although the procedures became more flexible, the pressures for change were also becoming stronger, and the increase in flexibility did not keep up with the increased social and economic stresses. d Violent methods are generally used when legal methods of securing a governmental change are useless because they are either too rigid—as in the case of ruling monarchies where the ruler actually controls policy formation—or not rigid enough. It was once remarked, for example, that the throne of Russia was, until the seventeenth century, neither hereditary nor elective but “occupative.” The long series of abdications forced by the great Boyar-landlords and by the streltsý , the Kremlin palace guards, had weakened the hereditary principle, so that whoever took the throne became czar—precedence by birth counted for little. Some contemporary republics have ended up in this position, which comes about when a long series of illegal seizures of power leads to a decay of the legal and political structures needed to produce new governments. Thus, Syria went through more than a dozen coups before the Assad family dynasty was established by Hafez al-Assad’s 1970 coup, and the provisions for open general elections, written in the Hourani constitution, could no longer be applied because the necessary supervisory machinery decayed and disappeared. Assuming, however, that there is an established procedure for changing the leadership, then all other methods must fall within some category of illegality. What we call them e depends on what side we are on, but, skipping some of the details, we use one of the following terms: 

 Coup d’Etat Revolution The action is conducted, initially at any rate, by uncoordinated popular masses, and it aims f at changing the social and political structures, as well as the personalities in the leadership. The term revolution has gained a certain popularity, and many coups are graced with it because of the implication that it was “the people” rather than a few plotters who did the whole thing. Thus, the obscure aims Abd al-Karīm Qāsim had in mind when he overthrew the Iraqi regime of King Faisal II and Prime Minister Nuri es-Said are locally known as the “sacred principles of the July 14th Revolution.” 

 Coup d’Etat Civil War Civil war is outright warfare between elements of the armed forces and/or the population at large. The term is perpetually unfashionable: whenever there is a civil war, all sides typically deny its existence, variously passing it off as an international war (such as the “War between the States” of the Confederacy) or, more often, as a foreign aggression, though in Franco’s Spain, the civil war of 1936–1939 was always la cruzada —“the crusade.” 

 Coup d’Etat Pronunciamiento This is an essentially Spanish and South American version of the military coup d’état, but many recent African coups have also taken this particular form. In its original nineteenth-century Spanish version, it was a highly ritualized process: first came the trabajos (literally, “the works”), in which the opinions of army officers were sounded. The next step was the compromisos, in which commitments were made and rewards promised; then came the call for action and, finally, the appeal to the troops to follow their officers in rebellion against the government. The pronunciamiento was often a liberal rather than a reactionary phenomenon, and the theoretical purpose of the takeover was to ascertain the “national will”—a typically liberal concept. Later, as the army became increasingly right wing while Spanish governments became less so, the theory shifted from the neoliberal “national will” to the neoconservative “real will” theory. The latter postulates the existence of a national essence, a sort of permanent spiritual structure, which the wishes of the majority may not always express. The army was entrusted with the interpretation and preservation of this “essential Spain” and the obligation to protect it against the government and, if need be, against the people. The pronunciamiento was organized and led by a particular army leader, but it was carried out in the name of the entire officer corps; unlike the putsch, which is carried out by a faction within the army, or the coup, which can also be executed by civilians using some army units, the pronunciamiento leads to a takeover by the army as a whole. Many African takeovers, in which the army has participated as a whole, were, therefore, very similar to the classic pronunciamiento. 

 Coup d’Etat Putsch Essentially a wartime or immediately postwar phenomenon, a putsch is attempted by a formal body within the armed forces under its appointed leadership. The Kornilov putsch is a clear example: Lavr Kornilov, a general in charge of an army group in northern Russia, attempted to seize the then Petrograd (St. Petersburg) in order to establish a “fighting” regime that would prosecute the war. (Had he succeeded, the city would, perhaps, have borne his name instead of Lenin—as it did until 1991.) 

 Coup d’Etat Liberation A state may be said (by supporters of the change) to be liberated when its government is overthrown by foreign military or diplomatic intervention. A classic case of this was the installation of the Communist leadership in Romania in 1947. The USSR forced the then King Michael to accept a new Cabinet by threatening direct military force by the Soviet army. 

 Coup d’Etat War of National Liberation, Insurgency, etc. In this form of internal conflict, the aim of the initiating party is not to seize power within the state but rather to set up a rival state structure. This can be politically, ethnically, or religiously based, as with the Taliban, whose aim is an Afghanistan wholly converted to their own Deobandi, g or Wahhabi Islam, which contrives to be both the official state religion of Saudi Arabia and a rigorously fanatical ideology that denies any legitimacy whatever to any other form of Islam, let alone non-Muslim faiths. As for secessionist insurgencies, they are necessarily ethnically based—though ethnicity can be all in the mind, as with Eritreans and Ethiopians, as with the Kurds of Iraq, as well as Iran and Turkey, the Somalis of Kenya and Ethiopia, the Karen people in Burma, and, formerly, the Nagas of India. 

 Coup d’Etat The Definition of the Coup d’État A coup d’état involves some elements of all these different methods by which power can be seized, but, unlike most of them, the coup is not assisted by the intervention of the masses or by any large-scale form of combat by military forces. The assistance of these forms of direct force would no doubt make it easier to seize power, but it would be unrealistic to think that they would be available to the organizers of a coup. Because we will not be in charge of the armed forces, we cannot hope to start the planning of a coup with sizeable military units already under our control, nor will the pre- coup government usually allow us to carry out the propaganda and organization necessary to make effective use of the “broad masses of the people.” A second distinguishing feature of a coup is that it does not imply any particular political orientation. Revolutions are usually leftist, while the putsch and the pronunciamiento are usually initiated by right-wing forces. A coup, however, is politically neutral, and there is no presumption that any particular policies will be followed after the seizure of power. It is true that many coups have been of a decidedly right-wing character, but there is nothing inevitable about that. h If a coup does not make use of the masses, or of warfare, what instrument of power will enable it to seize control of the state? The short answer is that the power will come from the state itself. The long answer makes up the bulk of this book. The following is our formal and functional definition of a coup: A coup consists of the infiltration of a small but critical segment of the state apparatus, which is then used to displace the government from its control of the remainder. a In Britain, there is the constitutional fiction that civil servants—as their name implies—are the servants of the Crown. In the United States, while the days when party hacks moved en masse to Washington after an election victory are long past, many top administrative positions are still given to political associates rather than left to professionals. b The bonds are religious in origin, since the Saudi royal house is the traditional promoter of the extremely strict Wahhabi interpretation of Islam. c Historically speaking, the trend was initiated by the American Revolution; its impact on the world at large was, however, attenuated by America’s distance and exotic nature. d Perhaps the ultimate source of destabilizing pressures has been the spectacular progress of scientific discovery and the resultant technological change. This is, however, a problem far beyond the scope of this book. e The equation “Insurgency = Terrorism = War of National Liberation” is particularly familiar. f In the initial stages, no aims are conceptualized, but the scope of the action may be clearly perceived. g Deoband is an inoffensive Indian town north of Delhi, as well as the seat of the immense Darul Uloom Muslim school, which teaches a rigorously extremist Wahhabi Islam (of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab (1703–1792), itself a revival of the maximalist Jihadist doctrine of Aḥmad ibn Taymiyyah. This brand of Islam was imported from northeast Arabia at its 1866 foundation, and its disciples have started perhaps 30,000 schools around the world. Its uncompromising fanaticism (it was a Darul Uloom sentence that authorized the Taliban’s destruction of the colossal Buddhas of Bamiyan in 2001) is rewarded by tax-exempt status in India—all is forgiven of Darul Uloom because its extremism includes an anti-Pakistan stance, albeit motivated by its belief that all of India should be Muslim-ruled (!). h The Greek coup of 1967 reinforced this image of the “reactionary coup, ” but the Syrian coup of 1966, the Iraqi coup of 1958, and the Yemeni coup of 1962 were all essentially leftist, if hardly liberal or progressive. 

 Coup d’Etat Chapter 2 When Is a Coup d’État Possible? The Bolsheviks have no right to wait for the Congress of Soviets … They must take power immediately … Victory is assured and there are nine chances out of ten that it will be bloodless … To wait is a crime against the revolution. —Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov Lenin, October 1917 The process of decolonization that started soon after the end of the Second World War first doubled and then more than tripled the number of independent states, so that the opportunities open to us have expanded in a most gratifying manner. We have to recognize, however, that not all states make good targets for our attentions. There is nothing to prevent us from carrying out a coup in, say, the United Kingdom, but we would probably be unable to stay in power for more than a short time. The public and the bureaucracy have a basic understanding of the nature and legal basis of government, and they would react in order to restore a legitimate leadership. This reaction renders any initial success of the coup meaningless, and it would arise even though the pre- coup government may have been unpopular and the “new faces” may be attractive. The reaction would arise from the fact that a significant part of the population takes an active interest in political life—and regularly participates in it. This implies a recognition that the power of the government derives from its legitimate origin, and even those who have no reason to support the old guard have many good reasons to support the principle of legitimacy. We are all familiar with the periodic surveys which show that, say, 20 percent of the sample failed to correctly name the prime minister, and we know that a large part of the population has only the vaguest contact with politics. Nevertheless, in most developed countries, those who do take an active interest in politics form, in absolute terms, a very large group. Controversial policy decisions stimulate and bring to the surface this participation: pressure groups are formed, letters are sent to the press and the politicians, petitions and demonstrations are organized, and this adds up to a continuing dialogue between the rulers and the ruled. This dialogue does not depend necessarily on the existence of a formally democratic political system. Even in one-party states, where power is in the hands of a few self-appointed leaders, a muted but nevertheless active dialogue can take place. The higher organizations of the party can discuss policy decisions, and, in times of relative relaxation, the discussions extend to the larger numbers in the lower echelons and to publications reflecting different “currents”—though only within the wider framework of the accepted ideology and the broad policy decisions of the leadership. The value of the dialogue that takes place in nondemocratic states varies greatly. In the former Yugoslavia, for example, the Communist Party contrived to remain in control for decades while nevertheless functioning to an increasing extent as a semi-open forum for increas ingly free, increasingly wide-ranging debates on major political issues; the press, though unable to assert truly independent opinions, at least echoed those debates. In the process, while there was still no democracy, the population evolved from subjection to participation, learning to scrutinize and question orders instead of simply obeying them, so that they were increasingly likely to resist a coup. In the Arab world, by contrast, the nominal “ruling parties” that functioned from the 1960s—the Arab Socialist Union (ASU) of Egypt and the Ba‘ath Party of Syria and Iraq—very soon degenerated into mere rubber stamps for the ruling dictators, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Hafez al-Assad, and Saddam Hussein. As time went on, their pretended deference to party councils dissolved, but all along they had made every significant decision by themselves, while the parties could only cheer them on. (When the question came up of whether Egypt’s ASU-dominated National Assembly would accept Nasser’s withdrawal of his resignation following the June 1967 debacle known as the Six-Day War, an observer pointed out that the assembly “will jolly well do what it is told.”) With the Yugoslav Communist Party, the ASU, and the “ruling” Ba‘ath Party now but a memory, the very greatest of questions across the entire horizon of global politics is, of course, the future of the Zhōngguó Gòngchǎndǎng, the Communist Party of China. Until the 2012 appointment of Xi Jinping as party general secretary, president of the People’s Republic of China, and the chairman of the Central Military Commission (significantly the most powerful of all three), the party’s future seemed quite predictable: it was becoming a holding company for all the public wealth and much of the private wealth of China, whereby officials continued to receive their very modest salaries that did not exceed RMB 11,385 or US$1,854 per month in 2015, even in the very highest rank; meanwhile, the party officials collected large amounts in bribes, ensuring a degree of affluence even at the village level, rising to sometimes very great wealth at the top. (As a faithful fan of Beijing’s top discos, I grew accustomed to seeing the young sons of party officials driving up in their Ferraris and Lamborghinis.) But the continued transformation of the Communist Party of China into a megacorporation manned by the ambitious, duly rewarded with increasingly overt payoffs, was interrupted by the decision of Xi Jinping’s high-party colleagues to elevate him to a seat of unprecedented power. They did so, most likely, because they feared that the party’s further degeneration into an openly corrupt enterprise would lead to an outright collapse—the problem with bribes is that their distribution is very uneven, generating corrosive resentments and embarrassing leaks. As a result, Xi Jinping is left with the pretty problem of finding a substitute for both a putrefying ideology and the lost incentive of corruption, with only Han nationalism ready at hand. Still, for the time being, the Communist Party persists, as does subjection rather than citizenship. • • • A running dialogue between rulers and the ruled that precludes any coup can only exist if there is a large enough section of society that is sufficiently literate, well fed, and secure enough to talk back. Even then, certain conditions can lead to a deterioration of the relationship, and this sometimes generates sufficient apathy, or outright distrust of the regime to make a coup possible. The events of 1958 in France were marked by a formal adherence to the then constitutional rules but were, nevertheless, analogous to a coup. Twenty years of warfare, which had included the ignominious defeat of 1940, the German occupation, the installation of the authoritarian Vichy regime and, from 1946, long and losing colonial wars in Indochina and Algeria, had thoroughly undermined the country’s democratic consensus. The continual changes of government had dissipated the interest and respect of most voters and left the bureaucracy leaderless because the complex business of the ministries could not be mastered by ministers who were only in power for months or weeks. The French army was left to fight the bitter Algerian war with little guidance from the Paris authorities because, more often than not, the ministries were too busy fighting for their survival in the assembly to worry about the other, bloodier, war. The cost of the Algerian war, in both money and lives, antagonized the general public from both the army and the government, and many of the French felt a growing fear and distrust of the army’s leadership, whose nationalist sentiments and martial ideology seemed alien to many of them—and against the spirit of the times. While the structures of political life under the Fourth Republic were falling apart, Charles de Gaulle, the grand heroic figure long in simulated retirement, gradually emerged as the only alternative to the chaos that threatened. When the army in Algeria appeared to be on the verge of truly drastic action and yet another government was on the verge of collapse, de Gaulle was recalled. He was able to impose his own terms. On May 29, 1958, when René Coty, the last president of the Fourth Republic, called on him to form a government (which was invested on June 1), de Gaulle was given extraordinary powers to rule by decree for six months and to write a new constitution. Under the terms of this constitution, presented for consultation in mid-August and approved by referendum in September, elections were held in which de Gaulle’s newly formed Union for the New Republic (UNR Party) won a majority. On December 21, de Gaulle became the first president of the Fifth Republic. He was an American-style president with wide executive powers, but without an American-style Congress to restrain them. By 1958, France had become politically inert and, therefore, ripe for a coup. The circumstances were unique, of course, but while the political structures of all highly developed countries may seem too resilient to make them suitable targets, if acute enough, even temporary factors can weaken them fatally. Of those temporary factors, the most common are: (a) severe and prolonged economic crisis, with large-scale unemployment or runaway inflation; (b) a long and unsuccessful war or a major defeat, whether military or diplomatic; (c) chronic instability under a multiparty system. Italy is an interesting example of an economically developed, socially dynamic, but politically fragile country. Between 1948 and circa 1990, i.e., the end of the Cold War, the persistence of a large Communist Party that opposed Italy’s alignment with the West (if less vehemently after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968) forced the moderate majority to keep voting for the increasingly corrupt Democrazia Cristiana (DC), which itself ruled with the smaller but even more corrupt Socialist Party (its leader, Bettino Craxi, would die a fugitive outlaw in Tunisia). Because even the two parties did not attain a parliamentary majority, every government required a broader coalition whose formation amounted to an intricate puzzle: the DC was the largest party, but with only 30 percent of the votes, it could not rule alone; even with the Socialists, it only reached the 40 percent mark. If it brought in the two small left-of-center parties (the Social Democrats and the Republicans), the right-of-center parties—including the MSI neo-Fascists—would not join in; but, if the latter were invited to join the coalition, the left would break away and no government could be formed. In the end, of course, votes were procured one way or another, mostly by handing over control of parts of the vast array of state-owned businesses (everything from oil and gas to ice cream) in exchange for parliamentary support. The votes, however, did not stay bought for long, and coalitions had short lives: between 1945 and 1994, there were 33 governments, until the 1994 election victory of the television and advertising tycoon Silvio Berlusconi, whose brand-new party, Forza Italia, was originally formed by its own employees and the Milan football team’s fan club. While the DC was unable to modernize Italy’s increasingly outdated state institutions, it nevertheless presided over decades of economic growth. The combination of Communist and Catholic anticapitalism made it impossible to introduce either American-style “hire and fire” labor flexibility or German-style economic discipline enforced by sophisticated trade unionists; but the DC had its own remedy: every time wage rates were pushed too high, it devalued the lira to restore the competitiveness of Italian exports. Equally, the inability to make the state efficient was offset by the lax enforcement of tax collection; thus, Italian entrepreneurs ill served by an inefficient state only had to pretend that they were paying their taxes. First one and then the other of these practices came to an end once Italy adopted the common European currency, the euro, in 1999 prohibiting competitive devaluations, and since then its economy has stagnated, with little or no growth, and chronically high unemployment. Politically, on the other hand, Berlusconi’s combination of (a) economic power (his enterprises could offer very many jobs, consultancies, and contracts), (b) media influence (through the control of publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, and three television channels), and (c) of course electoral power (through the votes he won by vigorous and well-organized campaigning) ensured his political preponderance from 1994 until 2011, even when out of office; as of 2015, the government of Matteo Renzi is sustained by a parliamentary majority that still requires Berlusconi’s votes. Berlusconi’s leading role in Italy’s public life over more than twenty years has coexisted with the most blatant conflicts of interest (he was operating state-regulated businesses), a long series of trials for tax evasion and vote-buying, and numerous personal scandals arising from his delight in cavorting with young or very young prostitutes. Hence, his prominence in Italian politics is quite enough to describe the country’s political order as fragile—he could not have survived in a fully functioning democracy that requires of its leaders some semblance of discretion in their personal conduct and the careful concealment of significant conflicts of interest. 

 Coup d’Etat The Preconditions of the Coup In 1958, France was a country where the dialogue between the government and the people had temporarily broken down. But much of the world’s population lives in countries where a dialogue cannot take place at all. If we draw up a list of those countries that have experienced coups, we shall see that, though their ethnic and historical backgrounds differ very considerably, they share certain social and economic characteristics. By isolating these factors, we can develop a set of indicators that, when applied to the basic socioeconomic data of a country, will show whether it will make a good target for a coup. 