The Grand Strategy of the Byzantine Empire
The Grand Strategy of
the Byzantine Empire
E D WA R D N . L U T T WA K
T H E B E L K N A P P R E S S O F
H A RVA R D U N I V E R S I T Y P R E S S
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England
2009
Copyright © 2009 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Luttwak, Edward.
The grand strategy of the Byzantine Empire / Edward N. Luttwak.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-674-03519-5 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Byzantine Empire—Military policy.
2. Strategy—History—To 1500.
3. Military art and science—Byzantine Empire—
History.
4. Imperialism—History—To 1500.
5. Byzantine Empire—History, Military.
6. Byzantine Empire—Foreign relations.
I. Title.
U163.L86
2009
355′.033549500902—dc22
2009011799
Contents
List of Maps
vii
Preface
ix
I
The Invention of Byzantine Strategy
1
1
Attila and the Crisis of Empire
17
2
The Emergence of the New Strategy
49
II
Byzantine Diplomacy: The Myth and the Methods
95
3
Envoys
97
4
Religion and Statecraft
113
5
The Uses of Imperial Prestige
124
6
Dynastic Marriages
137
7
The Geography of Power
145
8
Bulghars and Bulgarians
171
9
The Muslim Arabs and Turks
197
III
The Byzantine Art of War
235
10
The Classical Inheritance
239
11
The Strategikon of Maurikios
266
12
After the Strategikon
304
13
Leo VI and Naval Warfare
322
14
The Tenth-Century Military Renaissance
338
15
Strategic Maneuver: Herakleios Defeats Persia
393
Conclusion: Grand Strategy and the Byzantine
“Operational Code”
409
Appendix: Was Strategy Feasible in Byzantine Times?
421
Emperors from Constantine I to Constantine XI
423
Glossary
427
Notes
433
Works Cited
473
Index of Names
491
General Index
495
vi
• Contents
Maps
1.
The division of the empire after
the death of Theodosius I in 395
2
2.
The Great Eurasian Steppe
8
3.
The defenses of Constantinople
68
4.
The empire at the accession and
death of Justinian, 527–565
82
5.
The empire in 1025 at the death of Basil II
194
6.
The Muslim offensives, 662–740
200
7.
The empire in 668, after the Slav, Lombard,
and Muslim invasions
213
8.
The empire in 780, after the Muslim conquests
and the Bulghar settlement
216
9.
The empire in 1081 at the accession of
Alexios I Komnenos
228
10.
The empire in 1143 at the death of John II Komnenos
230
11.
The empire at the death of
Michael VIII Palaiologos in 1282
233
12.
The Sasanian empire, ca. 226–ca. 651
394
13.
The empire in 565, 1025, and 1360
411
Preface
Once largely neglected, as if the entire Roman empire had really ended
in 476, the eastern half that we call Byzantine by modern habit now at-
tracts so much attention that it is even the subject of popular histories.
While many are interested in the culture of Byzantium, it is the epic
struggle to defend the empire for century after century against an un-
ending sequence of enemies that seems to resonate especially in our own
times. This book is devoted to one dimension of Byzantine history: the
application of method and ingenuity in the use of both persuasion and
force—that is to say, strategy in all its aspects, from higher statecraft
down to military tactics.
When I ﬁrst started to study Byzantine strategy in earnest, I had just
completed a book on the strategy of the Roman empire up to the third
century that continues to attract both inordinate praise and strenuous
criticism. My original intention was simply to write a second volume to
cover the subsequent centuries. What ensued instead was the discovery
of an altogether richer body of strategy than the earlier Romans had
ever possessed, which called for a vastly greater effort of research and
composition. In the end, this lasted for more than two decades, albeit
with many interruptions—some due to my not entirely unrelated work
in applying military strategy in the ﬁeld. There was one compensation
for this prolonged delay: several essential Byzantine texts once available
only as scarcely accessible manuscripts, or in antiquated editions replete
with errors, have now been published in reliable form. Also, a consider-
able number of important new works of direct relevance to Byzantine
strategy have been published since I started on my quest long ago.
For in recent years Byzantine studies have indeed ﬂourished as never
before. A great wave of ﬁrst-class scholarship has illuminated many a
dark corner of Byzantine and world history—and it has also inspired a
climate of high-spirited generosity among the practitioners. Although I
am more student than scholar in this ﬁeld, I have experienced this gener-
osity in the fullest measure.
Soon after I started reading for this book, circa 1982, George Dennis,
whose translation of the Strategikon is the most widely read of Byz-
antine military texts, gave me an advance typescript of his work that
would be published as Three Byzantine Military Treatises. Twenty-six
years later, he sent me a typescript of part of his eagerly awaited edition
of Leo’s Taktika, which I urgently needed to complete this book; gener-
osity is mere habit for George T. Dennis of the Society of Jesus. Walter
E. Kaegi Jr., whose works illuminate the ﬁeld, also gave me valuable ad-
vice early on.
Others whom I had never even met, but simply importuned without
prior introduction, nevertheless responded as if bound by old friend-
ship and collegial obligations. Peter B. Golden, the eminent Turcologist
amply cited in these pages, answered many questions, offered valu-
able suggestions, and lent me two otherwise unobtainable books. John
Wortley entrusted me with the unique copy of his own annotated type-
script of Scylitzes. Peter Brennan and Salvatore Cosentino offered im-
portant advice, while Eric McGeer and Paul Stephenson and Denis F.
Sullivan, whose work is here conscripted at length, read drafts of this
book, uncovering errors and offering important advice. John F. Haldon,
whose writings constitute a library of Byzantine studies in themselves,
responded to a stranger’s imposition with a detailed critique of an early
draft.
Because what follows is intended for non-specialists as well, I asked
two such, Anthony Harley and Kent Karlock, to comment on the
lengthy text; I am grateful for their hard work, considered opinions, and
corrections. A third reader was Hans Rausing, not a specialist but a pro-
found and multilingual student of history, and to him I owe valuable ob-
servations. Stephen P. Glick applied both his encyclopedic knowledge of
military historiography and his meticulous attention to the text, leaving
his mark on this book. Nicolò Miscioscia was my able assistant for a
season. Christine Col and Joseph E. Luttwak researched and graphically
prepared all the maps, no easy task amidst endless revisions. Michael
x
• Preface
Aronson, senior editor for social sciences at Harvard University Press,
was the active proponent of my earlier book on Roman grand strategy a
long time ago. It was with unending patience over two decades that he
asked for this book as well, and his experienced enthusiasm is manifest
in the physical quality of the publication, an effort in which he was ably
assisted by Donna Bouvier and Hilary S. Jacqmin of the Press. It was
most fortunate that they commissioned Wendy Nelson to serve as manu-
script editor. With inﬁnite care and talented discernment she uncovered
many a stealthy error, and gently indicated infelicities in need of remedy.
Finally, it is a pleasure to thank Alice-Mary Talbot, also here cited, Di-
rector of the Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, and
the always helpful Deb Brown Stewart, Byzantine studies librarian at
Dumbarton Oaks. I might have dithered forever instead of ﬁnally com-
posing the text had I not met Peter James MacDonald Hall, who de-
manded the book and removed the excuse of all other work.
Preface
• xi
The Grand Strategy of the Byzantine Empire
W
p a r t o n e
The Invention of
Byzantine Strategy
When the administration of the Roman empire was divided in the year
395 between the two sons of Theodosius I, with the western portion go-
ing to Honorius and the eastern to his brother Arkadios, few could have
foretold the drastically different fates of the two halves. Defended by
Germanic ﬁeld commanders, then dominated by Germanic warlords,
increasingly penetrated by mostly Germanic migrants with or without
imperial consent, then fragmented by outright invasions, the western
half of the empire progressively lost tax revenues, territorial control,
and its Roman political identity in a process so gradual that the removal
of the last imperial ﬁgurehead, Romulus Augustus, on September 4,
476, was mere formality. There were local accommodations with the in-
vaders in places, even some episodes of cultural integration, but the
newly fashionable vision of an almost peaceful immigration and a grad-
ual transformation into a benign late antiquity is contradicted by the
detailed evidence of violence, destruction, and the catastrophic loss of
material amenities and educational attainments that would not be re-
covered for a thousand years, if then.1
Very different was the fate of the eastern half of the Roman empire
commanded from Constantinople. That is the empire we call Byzantine
by modern habit though it was never anything but Roman to its rulers
and their subjects, the romaioi, who could hardly identify with provin-
cial Byzantion, the ancient Greek city that Constantine had converted
into his imperial capital and New Rome in the year 330. Having sub-
dued its own Germanic warlords and outmaneuvered Attila’s Huns in
the supreme crisis of the ﬁfth century that extinguished its western
Map 1. The division of the empire after the death of Theodosius I in 395
counterpart, the Byzantine empire acquired the strategic method with
which it resisted successive waves of invaders for more than eight hun-
dred years by the shortest reckoning.
Again and again the eastern empire was attacked by new and old ene-
mies advancing from the immensity of the Eurasian steppe, from the
Iranian plateau homeland of empires, from the Mediterranean coasts
and Mesopotamia, which came under Islamic rule in the seventh cen-
tury, and ﬁnally from the reinvigorated western lands as well. Yet the
empire did not collapse in defeat until the conquest of Constantinople in
the name of the Fourth Crusade in 1204, to then revive once more in
much-diminished form until the ﬁnal Ottoman victory of 1453.
Sheer military strength was enough to provide ample security for the
Roman empire when it was still undivided and prosperous, encompass-
ing all the lands around the entire Mediterranean and reaching deep
beyond them. Moderate taxation and voluntary recruitment were suf-
ﬁcient to keep ﬂeets and some three hundred thousand troops in con-
stant training in frontier forts and legionary garrisons, from which de-
tachments (vexillationes) could be gathered in ﬁeld armies to suppress
rare internal rebellions or repel foreign invaders.2 But until the third
century, the Romans rarely had to ﬁght to obtain the beneﬁts of their
military strength.
In every frontier province there were ﬂourishing cities and imperial
granaries to tempt the empire’s neighbors, but they usually preferred a
hungry peace to the certainty of harsh Roman reprisals or even outright
annihilation. Commanding superior combat strength, the Romans at
their imperial peak could freely choose between pure deterrence with
retaliation if needed, which required only ﬁeld armies, and an active
defense of the frontiers that required garrisons everywhere, and both
were tried in succession during the ﬁrst two centuries of our era. Even
later, when old and new enemies beyond the Rhine and Danube co-
alesced into mighty warrior confederations, while in the east formidable
Sasanian Persia replaced its weaker predecessor Arsacid Parthia, Ro-
man armies were still strong enough to contain them effectively with a
new strategy of defense-in-depth.3
The Byzantines never had such an abundance of strength. In 395
the empire’s administrative division—it was not yet a political division,
for both brothers jointly ruled both parts—followed the boundaries
between east and west ﬁrst decreed by Diocletian (284–305), which
bisected the entire Mediterranean basin into two almost equal halves.
It was a neat division, but it left the eastern Roman empire with three
The Invention of Byzantine Strategy
• 3
separate regions on three different continents. In Europe the eastern
boundary, marked off by the provinces of Moesia I and Praevalitania,
now in Serbia and Albania, also encompassed the territories of modern
Macedonia, Bulgaria, the Black Sea coast of Romania, Greece, Cyprus,
and European Turkey—the ancient Thrace—with Constantinople itself.
In Asia, imperial territory consisted of the vast peninsula of Anatolia,
now Asiatic Turkey, as well as Syria, Jordan, Israel, and a slice of north-
ern Iraq in the provinces of Mesopotamia and Osrhoene. In North Af-
rica, the empire had the provinces of Egypt, reaching far up the Nile in
Thebais, and the eastern half of modern Libya, composed of the prov-
inces of Libya superior and Libya inferior, the earlier Cyrenaica.
This was a rich inheritance of productive and taxpaying lands for the
ﬁrst ruler of the eastern empire, Arkadios (395–408). Grain-exporting
Egypt and the fertile plains of coastal Anatolia were especially valuable,
and only the Balkans had recently been seriously damaged by the raids
and invasions of Goths, Gepids, and Huns.
But from a strategic point of view, the eastern empire was at a great
disadvantage as compared to its western counterpart.4
On its long eastern frontier, running some ﬁve hundred miles from
the Caucasus to the Euphrates, it still had to face the persistently aggres-
sive Sasanian empire of Iran, which had long been the most dangerous
enemy of the united empire—but it could no longer summon reinforce-
ments from the armies of the west. It has recently been argued that the
Romans had an Iran complex dating back to the humiliating defeat
at Carrhae of 53 BCE, while in reality the Sasanians were not espe-
cially expansionist.5 Perhaps so, but their rulers styled themselves “King
of Kings of Eran and non-Eran” (Šahan Šah Eran ud Aneran) and the
Iran part alone encompassed Persia, Parthia, Khuzistan, Mesan, As-
syria, Adiabene, Arabia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Caucasian Al-
bania, Balaskan, Pareshwar, Media, Gurgan, Merv, Herant, Abarsahr,
Kerman, Sistan, Turan, Makran, Kusansahr, Kashgar, Sogdiana and the
mountains of Tashkent, and Oman on the other side of the sea—thereby
including some actual Byzantine territory, important Byzantine depend-
encies in the Caucasus, Armenian client states, and central Asian lands
that the Byzantines certainly never ruled but in which they had critical
strategic interests, notably a succession of valiant allies.6
The situation in the northeast was almost as bad; the Byzantines had
to defend the Danube frontier against successive invaders from the great
Eurasian steppe—Huns, Avars, Onogur-Bulghars, Magyars, Pechenegs,
and ﬁnally Cumans—all of them mounted archers inherently more dan-
4
• The Invention of Byzantine Strategy
gerous than the Germanic enemies of the western empire on the Rhine
frontiers. Even otherwise formidable Goths ﬂed in terror from the Hun
advance—and that was before Attila had united the Hun clans and
added many foreign subjects, Alans, Gepids, Heruli, Rugi, Sciri, and
Suevi, to his strength.
Nor did the eastern empire have the safe hinterlands of the western
half: coastal North Africa, which was then fertile and exported much
grain, the entire Iberian Peninsula shielded by the Pyrenees, the south-
ern Gallic provinces safely distant from the dangerous Rhine, and Italy
itself shielded by the natural barrier of the Alps. The geography of the
eastern empire was very different: except for Egypt and eastern Libya,
most of its territories were too near a threatened frontier to have much
strategic depth. Even Anatolia, which certainly shielded Constantinople
from overland invasion from the east, was mostly settled and produc-
tive along its Mediterranean and Black Sea coastal strips, both exposed
to attacks from the sea.
With more powerful enemies and a less favorable geography, the east-
ern empire was certainly the more vulnerable of the two.
Yet it was the western empire that faded away during the ﬁfth cen-
tury. In essence, the eastern, or Byzantine, empire so greatly outlasted
its western counterpart because its rulers were able to adapt strategi-
cally to diminished circumstances by devising new ways of coping with
old and new enemies. The army and navy, and the supremely important
tax-collection bureaucracy that sustained them both along with the em-
peror and all his ofﬁcials, changed greatly over the centuries, but there is
a deﬁnite continuity in overall strategic conduct: as compared to the
united Romans of the past, the Byzantine empire relied less on military
strength and more on all forms of persuasion—to recruit allies, dissuade
enemies, and induce potential enemies to attack one another. Moreover,
when they did ﬁght, the Byzantines were less inclined to destroy enemies
than to contain them, both to conserve their strength and because they
knew that today’s enemy could be tomorrow’s ally.
It was so at the beginning in the ﬁfth century, when the devastating
strength of Attila’s Huns was deﬂected with a minimum of force and a
maximum of persuasion—they attacked westward instead—and it re-
mained so even eight hundred years later: in 1282, when the powerful
Charles d’Anjou was preparing to invade from Italy intent on conquer-
ing Constantinople, he was suddenly immobilized by the loss of Sicily to
explosive revolt, the result of a successful conspiracy between emperor
Michael VIII Palaiologos (1259–1282), King Peter III of distant Aragon,
The Invention of Byzantine Strategy
• 5
