
--- PAGE 423 ---
just enough strength both on land and at sea simply to resist them at the
very walls of the city, and on the waters just in front of it—not to restore
an empire submerged by enemy forces. It is not a wild exaggeration to
say that July 626 could have been May 1453, as the beleaguered defend-
ers of Constantinople awaited the end.
The solution devised by Herakleios combined diplomacy and sub-
version (within both enemy camps) with a high-risk, relational maneu-
ver on a theater-wide scale—an historical rarity in itself. What was “re-
lational” about it, and very proﬁtably too, was that successive seasonal
raids by Herakleios had habituated Khusrau and his advisors to ex-
pect bold, deep, but ultimately inconclusive raids that would last a few
months till winter, and would leave the strategic situation unchanged.
Yes, the damage was sometimes painful, as with the destruction of the
Zoroastrian temple at Takht-I-Suleiman, a real blow to the prestige of
Khusrau and his dynasty. It claimed priestly authority—it was named
after Sasan or Sassan, great priest of the Temple of Anahita and grand-
father of Ardashir the founder—and its rulers were consecrate before
that same “royal” ﬁre of Adur Gushnasp.
But Khusrau evidently decided that even very damaging raids did
not justify the cost of the only fully reliable remedy, which was to with-
draw Sasanian forces from the newly conquered lands of Syria and
Egypt, to instead guard the old borders of the empire and its core terri-
tory in Mesopotamia. It would have meant abandoning Khusrau’s great
achievement—his unprecedented conquests of Byzantine territories.
In essence, in the crucial year 627 the Sasanians did not withdraw
from the west because they were sure that once his raiding was done,
Herakleios would again withdraw from the east. He did not, and the re-
sult was the end of a dynasty and an empire that had endured over four
centuries.
What happened next was the loss of the Levant, Egypt, and eventu-
ally North Africa to the Muslim conquest, but that scarcely nulliﬁed
the epic victory of Herakleios, because it was the empire itself that
Khusrau had wanted, and had claimed as the avenger of his benefactor
Maurikios, and not just the lands lost and regained only to be lost
again.
As the empire entered its most miserable years, in the gloom there still
shined the bright memory of what had been accomplished by the expe-
ditionary army of Herakleios. For that we have the testimony of our
major source, Theophanes, who died in 818: it is evident from his prose
that the memory of those glorious events had remained undimmed by
the passage of two centuries.
408
• The Byzantine Art of War

--- PAGE 424 ---
Conclusion: Grand Strategy and the
Byzantine “Operational Code”
All states have a grand strategy, whether they know it or not. That is in-
evitable because grand strategy is simply the level at which knowledge
and persuasion, or in modern terms intelligence and diplomacy, interact
with military strength to determine outcomes in a world of other states,
with their own “grand strategies.”
All states must have a grand strategy, but not all grand strategies are
equal. There is coherence and effectiveness when persuasion and force
are each well guided by accurate intelligence, and then combine syner-
gistically to generate maximum power from the available resources.
More often, perhaps, there is incoherence so that the fruits of persua-
sion are undone by misguided force, or the hard-won results of force are
spoiled by clumsy diplomacy that antagonizes neutrals, emboldens ene-
mies, and disheartens allies.
The Byzantines had no central planning staffs to produce documents
in the modern manner, including the recent innovation of formal state-
ments of “national strategy” that attempt to deﬁne “interests,” the means
to protect and enhance them, and the alignment of the two in rational
or at least rationalized terms. The Byzantines never called it that—even
“strategy” is only a Greek-sounding word not used by ancient or Byz-
antine Greeks. But they assuredly had a grand strategy, even if it was
never stated explicitly—that is a very modern and indeed rather dubious
habit—but certainly it was applied so repetitively that one may even ex-
tract a Byzantine “operational code.”
First, however, two matters must be deﬁned: the identity of the pro-

--- PAGE 425 ---
tagonists and the nature of strategy, or rather of the paradoxical logic of
strategy.
Identity
The Byzantine ruling elite faced the outside world and its unending dan-
gers with a strategic advantage that was neither diplomatic nor military
but instead psychological: the powerful moral reassurance of a triple
identity that was more intensely Christian than most modern minds can
easily imagine, and speciﬁcally Chalcedonian in doctrine; Hellenic in its
culture, joyously possessing pagan Homer, agnostic Thucydides, and ir-
reverent poets—though Hellene was a word long avoided, for it meant
pagan; and proudly Roman as the Romaioi, the living Romans, not
without justiﬁcation for Roman institutions long endured, at least sym-
bolically.1
But until the Muslim conquest took away the Levant and Egypt from
the empire, this triple identity was also a source of local disaffection
from the ruling Constantinopolitan elite, for of the three only the Ro-
man identity was universally accepted.
To begin with, the speakers of Western Aramaic and Coptic, who ac-
counted for most of the population of Syria and Egypt, including the
Jews in their land and beyond it, did not partake in the Hellenic cul-
ture—except for their own secular elites, which were organically part of
the Byzantine regime and were indeed often attacked by nativists as
“Hellenizers.” For the rest, the masses either did not know that Homer
ever lived, or were easily led by unlettered fanatical priests to vehe-
mently hate what they were too ignorant to enjoy.
Moreover, the zone that rejected Hellenism, as it had rejected the Ro-
man habit of bathing as too sensual, also rejected the excessively intel-
lectual Chalcedonian deﬁnition of the dual nature of Christ, both hu-
man and divine, insisting on the more purely monotheistic conception
of the single, divine nature of Christ.
That is the Monophysite creed still upheld by the Christians of the
Coptic churches of Egypt and Syria, the Orthodox churches of Ethiopia
and Eritrea, the Jacobite and Malankara Orthodox churches of India,
and in much more nuanced fashion by the Armenian Orthodox Apos-
tolic Church. In these ecumenical days, Orthodox Christians are no
longer deeply committed to their sides of the Chalcedonian dispute, but
the Byzantine empire of the sixth and seventh centuries was dangerously
divided by the Chalcedonian persecution on one side and, on the other,
410
• Conclusion

--- PAGE 426 ---
Map 13. The empire in 565, 1025, and 1360

--- PAGE 427 ---
by Monophysite vehemence, which rejected all imperial attempts at
doctrinal compromise, notably the monoenergism and monotheletism
of Herakleios.
None of this should have diminished the willingness of Monophysite
Christians to ﬁght for the empire against non-Christians, but it did, and
for good reasons: most non-Christians who attacked the empire were
not doctrinally anti-Christian, and several pagan enemies converted
to Christianity, notably the Bulghars, Magyars, Kievan Rus’, Serbs, and
Croats; the doctrinally anti-Christian Muslims, on the other hand, were
as purely monotheistic as the Jews, and more so than the Chalce-
donians.
The Muslim conquest saved the empire from these deep divisions by
cutting away its most vehement dissidents. It was by no means linguisti-
cally homogeneous even after that—there were many Armenian-speak-
ers in the east, and many Slav-speakers in the west, while in between
there long survived autochthonous languages, such as the Thracian, or
Bessic, spoken within sight of the Theodosian Wall and recorded among
monks within them. But none of that interfered with participation in the
Hellenic culture for those who wanted it, and a different original lan-
guage comported none of the divisiveness of the doctrinal fracture. It
might be said, therefore, that the loss of Syria and Egypt, unlike Latin-
speaking and Chalcedonian North Africa, was a mixed curse for the
empire: it brought the blessing of religious harmony, and increased cul-
tural unity.
The Muslim onslaught found a very large but disunited empire that
might have disintegrated entirely, given a little more bad luck, and left a
smaller, much poorer, but more united empire hardened to successfully
withstand six centuries of wars. (There are sound reasons not to abuse
the word crusade to describe Byzantine warfare, yet it had a holy war
dimension, certainly on the frontier as described in De Velitatione.)
This too is an explanation for the immense resilience of the imperial
ruling class in times of acute crisis, and during agonizingly protracted
periods of extreme insecurity: when all seemed bleak and hopeless, the
Christian faith, the culture of ancient Greece, and Roman pride com-
bined to reject surrender and inspire tenacity.2
The Logic of Strategy
“Strategy” is one of those Greek words that the Greeks never knew, for
the pan-Western word strategy (strategie, strategia, etc.) derives from
412
• Conclusion

--- PAGE 428 ---
strategos, often mistranslated as “general,” but in historical fact a com-
bined politico-military chief, and thus a better source-word for an activ-
ity that is equally broad. The logic of strategy is not quite so simple.
“Men do not understand . . . [the coincidence of opposites]: there is a
‘back-stretched connection’ like that of the bow.”3 Thus Herakleitos or
Heraclitus of Ephesus, thought very obscure by the ancients, but for us
entirely transparent after the experience of the paradoxes of nuclear de-
terrence, whereby the peaceful had to be constantly ready to attack in
retaliation, aggressors had to be meekly prudent, and nuclear weapons
could be useful only if they were not used. Deterrence unveiled for all to
see the paradoxical logic of strategy with its apparent contradictions,
turning the “back-stretched” connection that unites opposites into a
commonplace, except for those incurable innocents who fail to see that
safety could be the sturdy child of terror.
With that, Herakleitos, the ﬁrst Western strategic thinker (“War is the
father of all and king of all and so he renders some gods, others men, he
makes some slaves, others free”4), was ﬁnally vindicated, though long
before him many a cunning ﬁghter had won by instinctively applying
the paradoxical logic to surprise his enemy, a thing possible only when
the better ways of ﬁghting, hence the expected ways, are deliberately
renounced. When a reacting enemy is present, the straightest and broad-
est and best-paved highway is the worst road upon which to attack an
enemy, because it is the best road, while a bad road could be good. It is
by that same logic in dynamic action and reaction that the victories of
an advancing army can bring defeat once they exceed the culminating
point of success, indeed victory becomes defeat by the prosaic workings
of overextension. Likewise, warfare itself can yield peace by burning
out the strength and the will to continue ﬁghting.
Indeed, all that is formed and forged in the crucible of conﬂict eventu-
ally turns into its opposite, if only it persists long enough, a dynamic
version of the coincidentia oppositorum of Nicola de Cusa or Nikolaus
von Kues. It is not necessary to be philosophically inclined to apprehend
the logic, nor does one need to know of its existence in order to apply
it—but none that ever built an empire in war as the Romans did, or pre-
served one over the centuries as the East Romans did, could do so but
by obeying the logic. It starts with the simple, static contradiction of si
vis pacem para bellum (if you want peace, prepare war) and proceeds to
dynamic contradictions: if you defend every foot of a perimeter, you are
not defending the perimeter; if you win too completely, destroying the
enemy, you make way for another; and so on.
Grand Strategy and the Byzantine “Operational Code”
• 413

--- PAGE 429 ---
The only additional complication is that conﬂict unfolds at separate
levels—grand strategic, theater-strategic, operational, tactical—which
interpenetrate downward much more easily than upward. To cite a
modern example, Adolf Hitler’s choice of the wrong allies and the wrong
enemies at the level of grand strategy—he had Italy and Japan with
him, America, Russia, and the British empire against him—could not be
overcome by the many German tactical, operational, and even theater-
level victories, notably over France in 1940; and the ﬁnal outcome could
not have been changed by even larger battleﬁeld victories. Had the D-
Day landings been repulsed, Germany would still have lost the war, it is
only that the ﬁrst target of the ﬁssion bomb would have been Berlin in-
stead of Hiroshima. And even if there had been no ﬁssion bomb, Ameri-
cans, Russians, and the British empire would still have won the war in a
few more years. Tactical brilliance, operational ingenuity, even theater-
level victories cannot outweigh a defective grand strategy, while by con-
trast a coherent grand strategy requires only mere adequacy in theater
strategy, operational methods, and tactics.
Given overwhelming superiority, material or moral or any combina-
tion thereof, wars can be won and peace kept without need of strategy.
Antagonists too weak to react signiﬁcantly are, in effect, mere objects.
War may still present huge difﬁculties, for reasons of distance, terrain,
and so forth. But to overcome physical problems, it is not the paradoxi-
cal logic of strategy that is wanted but rather the “linear” logic of sound
common sense and functional procedures.
Hence it is those ﬁghting against the odds, the outnumbered, the be-
leaguered, and overambitious gamblers, who have tried to exploit the
logic of strategy to the fullest, accepting the resulting risks—sometimes
achieving victories disproportionate to their resources, sometimes col-
lapsing ignominiously. Naturally, therefore, more often than not, the
great names of strategy—Napoleon, most notably—ultimately failed.
Herakleitos succeeded, as we saw, the ingenuous Belisarios ultimately
did not; but most Byzantine commanders, while admiring both, pre-
ferred the prudent ways illustrated in the manuals, in which the para-
doxical logic was exploited—but only up to the limit of risks prudently
acceptable. We have seen how preoccupied the Byzantines were with the
need to maximize every possible tactical and operational advantage,
while studiously trying not to depend on military strength any more
than they had to.
In all their inﬁnite variety, grand strategies can be compared by the
extent of their reliance on costly force, as opposed to the leveraging of
414
• Conclusion

--- PAGE 430 ---
potential force by diplomacy (“armed suasion”), inducements (subsi-
dies, gifts, honors), and deception and propaganda. The lesser the ac-
tual force content, the greater the possibility of transcending the mate-
rial balance of strength, to achieve more with less. The Byzantines had
many precursors in this, but they became and perhaps remain the unsur-
passed masters. Before his death while retreating from a foolhardy at-
tempt to invade India, Alexander had already earned millennial glory by
conquering Achaemenid Iran, the only superpower for the Greeks. His
grand strategy certainly conformed to the paradoxical logic: while his
tactics were “hard”—frontal attacks by the infantry phalanx, and all-
out cavalry charges—Alexander’s diplomacy was “soft” and inclusive,
as symbolized by the encouragement of Macedonian-Iranian marriages,
to win over Achaemenid satraps and vassal peoples. Only the attempt to
extend his invention of consensual empire to India overshot his culmi-
nating point of success, for there was still an original Macedonian base
in his military strength, and it was by then excessively diluted.
As we have seen, the East Roman empire by us called Byzantine
was least Roman in its strategy, certainly after Justinian’s attempt at
total reconquest. Successively threatened from the east by Sasanian Per-
sia, the Muslim Arabs, and ﬁnally the Seljuk and Ottoman Turks, and
from the north by waves of steppe invaders, the Huns, Avars, Bulghars,
Pechenegs, Magyars, and Cumans, and from the west too by the ninth
century, the Byzantines could not hope to subdue or annihilate all com-
ers in the classic Roman manner.
To wear out their own forces, chieﬂy of expensive cavalry, in order to
utterly destroy the immediate enemy would only open the way for the
next wave of invaders. The genius of Byzantine grand strategy was to
turn the very multiplicity of enemies to advantage, by employing diplo-
macy, deception, payoffs, and religious conversion to induce them to
ﬁght one another instead of ﬁghting the empire. Only their ﬁrm self-im-
age as the only defenders of the only true faith preserved their moral
equilibrium. In the Byzantine scheme of things, military strength was
subordinated to diplomacy instead of the other way around, and used
mostly to contain, punish, or intimidate rather than to attack or defend
in full force.
The Byzantine “Operational Code”
It was an attractive Byzantine habit to convey what would now be called
“methodology” in the direct form of brisk injunctions or even avuncu-
Grand Strategy and the Byzantine “Operational Code”
• 415

--- PAGE 431 ---
lar advice—do this, do not do that, require fewer and less cumbersome
phrases than third-person hortatory language. That is the format I use
below to deﬁne most succinctly the essential norms of Byzantine strate-
gic culture. They are nowhere stated in any Byzantine source as compre-
hensively as in what follows, but can be imputed legitimately on the ba-
sis of observed behavior, as well as the diverse recommendations of the
Byzantine guidebooks and ﬁeld manuals here examined. A normative
summary that minimizes duplication is one way of deﬁning an opera-
tional code.5
I. Avoid war by every possible means in all possible circumstances, but
always act as if it might start at any time. Train both individual recruits
and complete formations intensively, exercise units against each other,
prepare weapons and supplies to be ready for battle at all times—but do
not be eager to ﬁght.
The highest purpose of maximum combat readiness is to increase the
probability of not having to ﬁght at all.
II. Gather intelligence on the enemy and his mentality, and monitor his
movements continuously. Patrols and reconnaissance probes by light
cavalry units are always necessary, but not sufﬁcient. Spies are needed
inside enemy territory to provide early warning of war threats, or at
least to report preparations for war, and help divine enemy intentions.
In between reconnaissance by combat units and espionage in civilian
garb, the middle layer of intelligence gathering is often the most produc-
tive: clandestine (= hidden in nature) scouting, that is, passive observa-
tion and reporting. Efforts to scout and prevent enemy scouting are sel-
dom wasted.
III. Campaign vigorously, both offensively and defensively, but attack
mostly with small units; emphasize patrolling, raiding, and skirmishing
rather than all-out attacks. Avoid battle, and especially large-scale bat-
tle, except in very favorable circumstances—and even then avoid it if
possible, unless the enemy has somehow fallen into a condition of com-
plete inferiority, as in the case of a ﬂeet badly damaged by storms.
IV. Replace the battle of attrition with the “nonbattle” of maneuver. On
the defensive, do not confront greatly superior forces; instead keep close
to invading armies, remaining just beyond their reach, to quickly pounce
on outnumbered detachments, baggage trains, and looting parties. Pre-
416
• Conclusion

--- PAGE 432 ---
pare ambushes large and small in the path of enemy forces, and lure
them into ambushes by feigned retreats. On the offensive, mount raids
or, better, probes that withdraw promptly if they encounter stiff resis-
tance. Rely on constant activity, even if each action is small in scale, to
demoralize and materially weaken the enemy over time.
V. Strive to end wars successfully by recruiting allies to change the over-
all balance of power. Diplomacy is therefore even more important in
war than at peace—not for the Byzantines the foolish aphorism that
when the guns speak, diplomats fall silent. In recruiting allies to attack
the enemy, his allies are the most useful recruits because they are nearest
and know best how to ﬁght the enemy’s forces. Enemy commanders suc-
cessfully subverted to serve the imperial interest are even better allies,
and the best of all might be found at the enemy’s court, or within his
family. But even peripheral allies that can only help a little are to be re-
cruited if at all possible.
VI. Subversion is the best path to victory. It is so cheap as compared to
the costs and risks of battle that it must always be attempted, even with
the most unpromising targets infused with hostility or religious ardor.
When facing an imminent jihadi offensive, the strategos is advised to be-
friend the emirs of the frontier castles, sending them “gift baskets.”6 No
exception was to be made for known fanatics: by the tenth century, the
Byzantines had certainly discovered that religious fanatics can also be
bribed, and indeed often more easily—they are creative in inventing reli-
gious justiﬁcations for taking bribes (“the ultimate victory of Islam is in-
evitable anyway . . .”).
VII. When diplomacy and subversion are not enough and there must be
ﬁghting, it should done with “relational” operational methods and tac-
tics that circumvent the most pronounced enemy strengths and exploit
enemy weaknesses. To avoid consuming the major combat forces, it
may be necessary to patiently whittle down the enemy’s moral and ma-
terial strength. That may require much time. But there is no urgency be-
cause as soon as one enemy is no more, another will surely take his
place for all is constantly changing as rulers and nations rise and fall.
Only the empire is eternal.
Note: The operational code outlined here allows for no historical evolu-
tion. Having claimed at the start that the construct here called “Byzan-
Grand Strategy and the Byzantine “Operational Code”
• 417

--- PAGE 433 ---
tine strategy” was invented during the ﬁfth century in response to the
speciﬁc circumstances of the time, I recognize that the very different cir-
cumstances of subsequent centuries left their marks on Byzantine strat-
egy. After all, the Byzantines learned from experience as well as any of
us: they did make the same mistake twice or three times or four times,
but after that they were unlikely to repeat the same mistake again, or
not in the same way at any rate. It is a lesser claim that is here ad-
vanced—that there was enough continuity to deﬁne an “operational
code,” and in thus conﬂating eight centuries I am reassured by eminent
predecessors.7
418
• Conclusion

--- PAGE 434 ---
Appendix
Emperors from Constantine I to Constantine XI
Glossary
Notes
Works Cited
Index of Names
General Index

--- PAGE 435 ---

--- PAGE 436 ---
Appendix: Was Strategy Feasible
in Byzantine Times?
An earlier book of mine, which has continued to attract inordinate
attention, was both praised and criticized for attributing a grand strat-
egy to the Romans of the ﬁrst three centuries CE.1 Noting the absence of
military or civil planning staffs, and of such elementary requirements
as accurate maps, some challenged the entire notion that the Romans
could think strategically at all, or even deﬁne their frontiers coherently.2
At least the lack of accurate maps was no great obstacle: large-scale sur-
vey techniques were in habitual use, while itineraries could be quite ac-
curate—there were even distance-measuring machines.3
As for the much larger question of the feasibility of strategy in Roman
and Byzantine times, the argument rests on how strategy is deﬁned. The
skeptics evidently see it as an essentially modern and bureaucratic activ-
ity, the result of explicit calculations and systematic decisions, destined
for equally systematic application. Their insistence on the importance
of geographic knowledge even suggests a confusion between strategy
and the discredited pseudo-science of Hausoferian “geopolitics.”4 I hold
that strategy is not about moving armies, as in board games, but rather
comprehends the entire struggle of adversarial forces, which need not
have a spatial dimension at all, as with the eternal competition between
weapons and countermeasures. Indeed, the spatial dimension of strat-
egy is rather marginal these days, and in some ways it always was.
It is the struggle of adversarial forces that generates the paradoxical
